The generic placement of this species is in flux. Most Angelonia species can be found in Northeastern Brazil in the Seasonally Dry Tropical Forest namely Caatinga. It is native to Colombia, Ecuador and Venezuela. Another use of radish is as cover or catch crop in winter or as a forage crop. In captivity, they may receive honey, eggs, fish, yams, shrub leaves, oranges, or bananas along with specially prepared food. The giant panda lives in a few mountain ranges in central China, mainly in Sichuan, but also in neighbouring Shaanxi and Gansu. It is recognized by many other common names based on the regions it grows in. Some botanists have not recognized Oldenlandia, but have placed some or all of its species in a broadly defined Hedyotis. It is a small to medium size evergreen tree, reaching 20 m tall. Everybody loves Black - eyed Susans, but as common as they are, they are widely misunderstood. Sweet Woodruff: A perennial often used as pretty ground cover, due to its clusters of small, white, star - shaped flowers, sweet woodruff also boasts both medicinal and culinary uses. However, water hemlock is infused with deadly cicutoxin, especially in its roots, and will rapidly generate potentially fatal symptoms in anyone unlucky enough to eat it. Ardisia elliptica is an evergreen tree, also known as the shoebutton ardisia, duck 's eye and coralberry, native to the west coast of India, Sri Lanka, Indochina, Malaysia, Indonesia and New Guinea. The participation of NO in the early transduction of the cold signal in Arabidopsis thaliana was investigated. The leaves are dark glossy above, and paler below. The fruit ripen in the autumn in the months of September and October. Rebutia is a genus in the family Cactaceae, native to Bolivia and Argentina. One consequence of this is that (unlike Virginia Creeper) it can not climb smooth walls, only through shrubs and trees. It has been introduced throughout the tropics, including many Caribbean countries and territories such as Jamaica where it is known simply as Jamaican apple or the more common Otaheite apple. Other uses of the pulp include traditional medicine and metal polish. Senecio species are used as food plants by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species — see list of Lepidoptera that feed on Senecio. 