The generic placement of this species is in flux. Most Angelonia species can be found in Northeastern Brazil in the Seasonally Dry Tropical Forest namely Caatinga. It is native to Colombia, Ecuador and Venezuela. Another use of radish is as cover or catch crop in winter or as a forage crop. In captivity, they may receive honey, eggs, fish, yams, shrub leaves, oranges, or bananas along with specially prepared food. The giant panda lives in a few mountain ranges in central China, mainly in Sichuan, but also in neighbouring Shaanxi and Gansu. It is recognized by many other common names based on the regions it grows in. Some botanists have not recognized Oldenlandia, but have placed some or all of its species in a broadly defined Hedyotis. It is a small to medium size evergreen tree, reaching 20 m tall. Everybody loves Black - eyed Susans, but as common as they are, they are widely misunderstood. Sweet Woodruff: A perennial often used as pretty ground cover, due to its clusters of small, white, star - shaped flowers, sweet woodruff also boasts both medicinal and culinary uses. However, water hemlock is infused with deadly cicutoxin, especially in its roots, and will rapidly generate potentially fatal symptoms in anyone unlucky enough to eat it. Ardisia elliptica is an evergreen tree, also known as the shoebutton ardisia, duck 's eye and coralberry, native to the west coast of India, Sri Lanka, Indochina, Malaysia, Indonesia and New Guinea. The participation of NO in the early transduction of the cold signal in Arabidopsis thaliana was investigated. The leaves are dark glossy above, and paler below. The fruit ripen in the autumn in the months of September and October. Rebutia is a genus in the family Cactaceae, native to Bolivia and Argentina. One consequence of this is that (unlike Virginia Creeper) it can not climb smooth walls, only through shrubs and trees. It has been introduced throughout the tropics, including many Caribbean countries and territories such as Jamaica where it is known simply as Jamaican apple or the more common Otaheite apple. Other uses of the pulp include traditional medicine and metal polish. Senecio species are used as food plants by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species — see list of Lepidoptera that feed on Senecio. They are native to North America. f.) Rchb. They are commonly called mouse - ear chickweed. Most are herbaceous perennial species found in open areas such as meadows, prairies, and savannas. When sheltered from the wind, it tends to grow as a small tree, up to seven metres high. The Winteraceae are magnoliids, and are associated with the humid Antarctic flora of the Southern Hemisphere. It is widely cultivated as an ornamental plant in temperate regions and hybridized for use in the garden. Howea is a genus of two palms, H. belmoreana and H. forsteriana, both endemic to Lord Howe Island, Australia. The genus name Cunninghamia honours Dr. James Cunningham, a British doctor who introduced this species into cultivation in 1702 and botanist Allan Cunningham. It was formerly placed in the Liliaceae. This species is found in Madagascar with a waxy flower occurring in spring and summer. The red tubers of this species can grow to be 3.8 cm (1.5 in) in diameter and may be a metre below ground. Tetradium is a genus of nine species of trees in the family Rutaceae, occurring in temperate to tropical east Asia. To test the effectiveness of this filter, light - saturated photosynthetic oxygen evolution rates were measured following exposure to UV - B filtered either by this urate filter or the widely used cellulose acetate (CA) filter. The main floral differences between Saurauia and the other members are that the species of Saurauia have 3 - 5 carpels while Actinidia has 3 - 30 or more and Clematoclethra has 4 or 5. By contrast, transposable elements displayed a general absence of colinearity among hom(oe)ologous haplotypes and appeared to have undergone dynamic expansion in Saccharum, compared with sorghum, its close relative in the Andropogonea tribe. A sterile hybrid between Fatsia japonica and Hedera hibernica, named × Fatshedera lizei, has been produced in cultivation in western Europe in both plain green and variegated forms. There is only known species, Philesia magellanica, native to southern Chile and southern Argentina. Some species are used in traditional medicine. Harrison 's Crossing, the causeway across the Narcissus Creek delta, alone avoided 400 m of swimming. It may have been introduced to the U.S. as the Isle of Man cabbage and subsequently evolved through the founder effect and geographic isolation into a new subspecies. Water deficit reduced tissue expansion both in leaves and in the capitulum, and induced the accumulation of soluble sugars in the meristem. 1: 492 (1981). The standard English name in its native area is creeping thistle. The plant is beneficial for pollinators that rely on nectar. Enneapogon is a cosmopolitan genus of plants in the grass family. They are generally known as niggerheads, bottle washers or pappus grass. Nardus is a genus of plants belonging to the grass family, containing the single species Nardus stricta, known as matgrass. Tachigali is a flowering plant genus in the legume family (Fabaceae) that contains 54 species. Species include: Psorothamnus species are native to the southwestern United States and northern Mexico. Tiger Lily (Lilium lancifolium, or Lilium tigrinum) formerly included in genusStrophanthus aambe = Papuechites aambe Any twining plant with a heart - shaped leaf, white and green above and purple beneath, is called a guaco by Native Americans, which does not necessarily coincide with which plants are “ guacos, as far as naturalists are concerned. For the plant species commonly known as Ipecacuanha, see Carapichea ipecacuanhaIpecacuanha was a genus of flowering plants in the Rubiaceae family but is no longer recognized. Myrica cerifera is a small tree or large shrub native to North and Central America and the Caribbean. The species are known as heaths or Australian heaths. There has been some confusion about its classification because of its ability to hybridise. A group of species with asymmetrical flowers marked in mauve and yellow, including Sparaxis variegata and Sparaxis villosa, was formerly treated as the genus Synnotia. The flowers are very simple, lacking obvious sepals or petals. The species have rhizomatous or tuberous roots, long narrow leaves and branched stems carrying starry white flowers. Painful convulsions, abdominal cramps, nausea, and death are common, and those who survive are often afflicted with amnesia or lasting tremors. Correlation among parameters under the different water treatments suggested that potential improvements in the intrinsic water - use efficiency (A(N)/g(s)) are possible without negative impacts on yield. There are two species, M. balsamum and M. peruiferum. Thysanotus fractiflexus Brittan South Australia (including Kangaroo Island) This particular palm can often be found mixed with Raphia palms in swamps and depressions. Rose considers his name and nature uncertain, he is in one Roman source given the name Polus, which may relate him to the sphere of heaven from pole to pole. It is a perennial wildflower growing from a corm. Fens have somewhat less acidic soil, which is also higher in nutrients. See also Dendrobium cuthbertsonii, whose flowers have been reported to last up to ten months each. It is a very soothing herb, and the scent is relaxing. Monomeria is a genus of orchids, with 3 recognized species native to Southeast Asia, China and the Himalayas. The plant usually produces only one yellow flower head per stem, nodding (hanging). Noccaea montana, the alpine pennycress, is a flowering plant in the family Brassicaceae. This is the first study documenting a PGPR effect on plant secondary metabolite profiles, and suggests the establishment of complex interactions between Azospirillum PGPR and maize. They can be dried. Tectiphiala ferox, or palmiste bouglé, is a species of flowering plant in the Arecaceae family. SynonymyThese genera have been brought into synonymy with Pachycereus: Saccorhiza polyschides, common name Furbellow, is a large brown algae of the lower shore and is the largest seaweed found in Europe. in the latest Angiosperm Phylogeny Group classification (2009). The sepals are usually white, often with a distinct blue tint. Moraea, the Cape tulips, is a genus of plants in the family Iridaceae, first described as a genus in 1758. They resemble the seeds of Abrus, snoutbeans (Rhynchosia), and Adenanthera, but are much larger than the former two. The effect of competition from neighbours on stomatal conductance in lettuce and tomato plants. Vaccinium macrocarpon is native to central and eastern Canada (Ontario to Newfoundland) and the northeastern and north - central United States (Northeast, Great Lakes Region, and Appalachians as far south as North Carolina and Tennessee). Lupinus perennis (also wild perennial lupine, wild lupine, sundial lupine, blue lupine, Indian beet, or old maid 's bonnets) is a medicinal plant in the Fabaceae family. P.D.Cantino Many individual trees are extremely old, and at one time, some populations were thought to be unable to reproduce in present - day conditions where they were growing, except by suckering (clonal reproduction), being remnant forest from a cooler time. Ionomics demonstrated a differential rearrangement of shoot nutrient levels in the extremophile upon salt exposure. Thyme is also wonderful for improving the taste of tomatoes. As a traditional herbal remedy it is known as an astringent and used in poultices. Adenostyles alpina is herbaceous perennial plant belonging to the genus Adenostyles of the Asteraceae family. Slow - release palm fertilizer with an NPK ratio of about 8 - 2 - 12 with at least 4 % magnesium is ideal. Polhillia is a genus of flowering plants in the legume family, Fabaceae. Sporobolus is a nearly cosmopolitan genus of plants in the grass family. The name Sporobolus means seed - thrower , and is derived from Ancient Greek word σπόρος (spóros), meaning seed , and the root of βάλλειν (bállein) to throw , referring to the dispersion of seeds. Acclimation to high CO2 in maize is related to water status and dependent on leaf rank. The only things not acceptable were biting and gouging out the opponent 's eyes. The term comes from the Greek παγκράτιον [ paŋkrátion ], literally meaning all of power from πᾶν (pan) all and κράτος (kratos) strength, might, power . Known as the diamond leaf pittosporum, this tree is planted in many parts of Australia as an ornamental. It refers to the wing that surrounds each seed. Molecular phylogenetic studies have shown that Hymenodictyon is paraphyletic over the Madagascan genus Paracorynanthe. In Hymenodictyon and Paracorynanthe, the stipules bear large deciduous glands called colleters. Like Schubert 's lesser - known Alfonso und Estrella, of the same time and place (Vienna, 1822), Euryanthe parts with the German Singspiel tradition, adopting a musical approach without the interruption of spoken dialogue characteristic of earlier German language operas such as Mozart 's Die Zauberflöte, Beethoven 's Fidelio, and Weber 's own Der Freischütz. The specific epithet, rupestre , is derived from Latin, and pertains to the plant growing among rocks. Tachigali multijuga Benth. The genus Fagopyrum is in the flowering plant family Polygonaceae. Pseudodidymocystis is a genus of green algae in the family Scenedesmaceae. Ananas is a plant genus of the bromeliad family (Bromeliaceae), native to South America and Central America, which includes the species Ananas comosus, the pineapple. This genus originated in Mesoamerica and was brought to the Caribbean Islands by the Carib natives. Passiflora antioquiensis, the red banana passionfruit, is a species in the Passifloraceae family. Heating around the apical shoots did not appear to induce significant changes in conduit dimension along the rest of the stem. Its stem is erect, branched, and 4–30 in (10–76 cm) high. The chlorosis is mainly attributed to a jasmonic acid (JA)-isoleucine analogue, coronatine (COR), produced by Pst DC3000. Africa, Latin America, and various oceanic islands. However, recent DNA - based phylogenetic studies support recognition of Mahonia, though after the removal of several species into the newly - described genera Alloberberis (formerly Mahonia section Horridae) and Moranothamnus (formerly Mahonia claireae). The name derives from nardos (νάρδος), the ancient Greek name for this plant. While often marketed in stores as a plant in a pot, in its natural state, the majesty palm grows to 98 feet (30 meters) tall. The palm has upward - arching leaves divided into long, thin fingers. Malpighia coccigera is a species of flowering plant in the family Malpighiaceae, that is native to the Caribbean. Summerhayesia is a genus of flowering plants from the orchid family, Orchidaceae. The flowers also have parts not distinctly differentiated into sepals and petals, while angiosperms that evolved later tend to have distinctly differentiated sepals and petals. Albizia julibrissin (Persian silk tree, pink silk tree) is a species of tree in the family Fabaceae, native to southwestern and eastern Asia. The genus is named after the Italian nobleman Filippo degli Albizzi, who introduced it to Europe in the mid-18th century, and it is sometimes incorrectly spelled Albizzia. The genus includes two or three species. Five to ten species have been listed for this genus. It has long been considered to have only one species, Coeloglossum viride, the frog orchid. The plant reproduces sexually by seed and vegetatively by sprouting from its rhizome. Erica carnea (winter heath, winter - flowering heather, spring heath, alpine heath ; syn. E. herbacea, E. mediterranea) is a species of flowering plant in the family Ericaceae native to mountainous areas of central and southern Europe, where it grows in coniferous woodlands or stony slopes. It is native to Africa, the Middle East and the Indian subcontinent. She participated in the minor regency government of her son, Constans II, in 641. Pontederia cordata, and another member of the family, Eichhornia crassipes, have become invasive in many tropical and temperate parts of the globe, but are, on the other hand, efficient biological filters of polluted water in constructed wetlands. Along with the Distaff, three epigrams ascribed to Erinna are known, preserved in the Greek Anthology. They are native to every continent except Antarctica, growing in both tropical and subtropical zones. The genus is also closely related to Melicope and is sometimes included within it. The flower head contains up to 60 yellow ray florets. Plerandra is a genus of flowering plants in the family Araliaceae that has long been considered a synonym of Schefflera, which has been a polyphyletic group. Poliomintha is a genus of flowering plants in the sage family, Lamiaceae. Colvillea is a genus of legume in the Fabaceae family. Karwinskia is a genus of flowering plants in the buckthorn family, Rhamnaceae. Tillandsia flabellata is a species in the genus Tillandsia. The word Eleutherococcus, from Greek, means free - berried. The settlers on the banks of the Hawkesbury (New South Wales) look upon it as a recent importation, and seed of it has been distributed under the name of Panicum speciabile. Leptochloa is a widespread genus of Asian, African, Australian, and American plants in the grass family. Members of the genus are commonly known as sprangletops. The generic name is derived from the Greek words ληπτος (leptos), meaning thin, and χλοα (chloa), meaning grass, referring to the inflorescences. Mapania is a genus of plants in the family Cyperaceae. The genus was named in honour of brothers Ferdinand Bauer and Franz Bauer, Austrian botanical illustrators. The inflorescence is a solitary flower head or cluster of a few heads. It has broadly lanceolate leaves up to 60 cm long, tapering at the tip and narrowing below to a long petiole. f. Molecular phylogenetic analysis also suggest affinities between Parasitaxus and the genera Manoao (New Zealand) and Lagarostrobos (Tasmania).The species was first described as Dacrydium ustum Vieill. Morus alba, known as white mulberry, is a fast - growing, small to medium - sized mulberry tree which grows to 10–20 m tall. The taxonomy of the genus is controversial, with some authors including Cascabela within Thevetia, while others accept the two genera as separate. Bogrush is a common name for these plants. Deppea is a genus of flowering plants in the family Rubiaceae. Aechmea aquilega is a species in the genus Aechmea. Figs are also of considerable cultural importance throughout the tropics, both as objects of worship and for their many practical uses. Cypella osteniana Beauverd, Bull. Clean water is scarce. Its common names include Seneca snakeroot, senega snakeroot, senegaroot, rattlesnake root, and mountain flax. Begonia elaeagnifolia is a plant species in the Begoniaceae family, endemic in Africa from Cameroon to the Congo. Rosemary is a definite scalp stimulator. In open - field conditions, all ECMs from the same sampling site showed an identical mating type and an identical haploid genotype, based on SSR analysis. There are only two living species, Dipteronia sinensis and Dipteronia dyeriana ; both are endemic to mainland China. It is part of the Erie Metropolitan Statistical Area. Cypella fucata Ravenna, Wrightia 7: 18 (1981). The relationship of this taxon to other taxa within the order is unknown (incertae sedis), and it has not yet been placed with certainty into any family. Dalhousiea is a genus of flowering plants in the legume family, Fabaceae. The leaves are used as a herb, in teas, and also as a flavouring. A molecular study supports the view that the plants are best classified within Pitcairnia. They are primarily pollinated by various oligolectic native bees (e.g., Centris, Epicharis, and Tetrapedia) that are specialized to collect floral oils, as the flowers do not offer the typical floral rewards. With regard to muscular recovery, an extract has been found to help muscles recover following severe injury , to reduce myocardial infarct size by 35–45 % when administered following a heart attack, and to inhibit apoptosis. It is native to North America, where it occurs in Alaska through much of Canada and the western and north - central United States. Subspecies: Arctagrostis is a genus of Arctic and Subarctic plants in the grass family, native to colder parts of Europe, Asia, and North America. An endangered associate tree is the Chilean wine palm, Jubaea chilensis, whose distribution was much wider prehistorically. Fenestraria (known as babies ' toes or window plant) is a (possibly monotypic) genus of succulent plants in the family Aizoaceae, native to the Namaqualand in Namibia. We quantified the hydrological niches of 96 species from eight fynbos communities in the biodiversity hotspot of the Cape Floristic Region, South Africa and 99 species from 18 lowland wet meadow communities in the UK. Tyloderma is a genus of hidden snout weevils in the family Curculionidae. Mabberley has it restricted to southeast Africa, Madagascar, and Mauritius. The inflorescence is up to 30 centimeters tall and bears many flowers along its length. It is the type species of the genus Cyrtopodium. Its members are commonly known as native gardenias in Australia. Artemisia tripartita is a species of flowering plant in the aster family known by the common name threetip sagebrush. The poison was used in 1978 to assassinate Georgi Markov, a journalist who spoke out against the Bulgarian government, and has been mailed to several U.S. politicians in failed terrorism attempts. The two species of which I have seen the most are Meconopsis aculeata (Kashmir to Kumaom) and Meconopsis grandis  the large Himalayan blue poppy (Nepal to Tibet). This is also reflected in its formerly used genus name Acanthopanax meaning thorny ginseng . The fruit is pea - sized, starting orange and turning to black at maturity. The genus name is often cited as Acoelorraphe, a spelling error to be corrected under the provisions of the ICBN. Kusamaki (クサマキ) and inumaki (犬槇) are Japanese names for this tree. The genus is native to the North America, especially in northern California, but also east to New Mexico and north to British Columbia and south into northwestern Mexico. These plants grow from perennial corms that produce a raceme or umbel - like inflorescence. Members of the genus are commonly known as blackfoots. Valonia (alga), an algae genus in the family Valoniaceae Some species are informally known as bedstraw. There are over 600 species of Galium, with estimates of 629 to 650 as of 2013. Aerenchyma formation is mediated by reactive oxygen species. Described on the Discovery Channel show Survivorman while in the Amazon jungle in late 2007, they were said to provide a flavor explosion , with a taste between a lemon and a tomato. Chives: Chives are a clumping herb, meaning that they grow tightly packed, which makes them a great choice for small spaces. It has been reported from much of the United States, Canada and Mexico including in the Appalachian Mountains from Alabama to New York State, the Great Lakes Region, the Ohio and Tennessee River Valleys, the Ozarks of Arkansas and Missouri, and the Rocky and Cascade Mountains of the West, from Mexico to Washington. Carnivorous plant growers consider D. spatulata to be a weed because it is very hardy and produces copious amounts of seed when it flowers. The name derives from the Ancient Greek metra or heartwood and sideron or iron . Lavandula (common name lavender) is a genus of 47 known species of flowering plants in the mint family, Lamiaceae. Polyporus umbellatus is a rare, edible species of mushroom, found growing on roots of old beeches or oak (e.g.). Arctotis fastuosa, called Monarch - of - the - veld, is a species of African plants in the daisy family, native to Namibia and South Africa. Pseuduvaria is a genus of 56 species of plants, of the plant family Annonaceae. Named after João Barbosa Rodrigues, an investigator of Brazilian orchids. The fruit is a wide or narrow, flattened legume pod containing one to five flat seeds. It is also known as turkey berry, prickly nightshade, shoo - shoo bush, wild eggplant, pea eggplant, pea aubergine, kantɔsi (Ghana), kittily (Liberia), susumber (Jamaica), boo, terongan, tekokak, rimbang, berenjena cimarrona, berenjena de gallina, berenjena silvestre, tabacón, pendejera, tomatillo, bâtard balengène, zamorette, friega - platos, kudanekayi (Kannada: ಕುದನೆಕಾಯಿ), sundaikkai (Tamil: சுண்டைக்காய்), (Malayalam: ചുണ്ട), thibbatu (Sinhala: තිබ්බටු), makhuea phuang (Thai: มะเขือพวง), suzume nasu (Japan: 雀茄子), jurubeba (Brazilian Portuguese), Ka Ran Sate Kay Thi (Myanmar - Arakan), and many other names (Howard 1989, Little and others 1974, Pacific Island Ecosystems at Risk 2001). A characteristic feature of this species is its superior ovary, which distinguishes it from any other member of Iridaceae. It is also a founding member of the United Nations, World Bank, World Trade Organization, Mercosur, Union of South American Nations, Community of Latin American and Caribbean States and the Organization of Ibero - American States. Subspecies + varietiesBidens tripartita subsp. bullatus (L.) Rouy Their garden hybrids have been popular among gardeners, beginning with Clematis × jackmanii, a garden standby since 1862 ; more hybrid cultivars are being produced constantly. Such a genus is not recognized as distinct by all authorities ; its species are often treated as members of genus Hemizonia. The eastern Asian species Acer amplum, Acer pictum, and Acer truncatum are also very closely related, and often confused with A. cappadocicum in cultivation. Peristylus is a genus of flowering plants from the orchid family, Orchidaceae. They inhabit the understory of primary forests. H. crispus may be solitary or like many other Haemanthus species, gregarious and growing in clumps. The fruits are small green or brown achenes. It is commonly seen growing under pine stands. It has short postembryonic roots, including adventitious and lateral roots, and a lower iron content in its leaves. Hops are the female flowers (seed cones, strobiles) of the hop species H. lupulus ; as a main flavor ingredient in beer, H. lupulus is widely cultivated for use by the brewing industry. f. Brachychiton populneus, commonly known as the Kurrajong, is a small to medium - sized tree found naturally in Australia in a diversity of habitats from wetter coastal districts to semi - arid interiors of Victoria, New South Wales and Queensland. Some 60 species are currently accepted, with about 39 still unresolved. The leaves are a soft grey - green, lighter on the underside, and elliptical shaped. However, no significant correlation occurred between the ionic effect and total intervessel pit membrane area per vessel, vessel diameter, vessel length, vessel wall area, and intervessel pit membrane thickness. The acid is found all over the entire plant. It has been sunk into synonymy with Plocama. The plant produces flower heads either one at a time or in dense flat - topped arrays of 2 - 50 heads. Glutamine synthetase (GS) plays a key role in the growth, nitrogen (N) use and yield potential of cereal crops. It includes ca 30 genera and about 725 species. The 1981 Cronquist system placed the family in a separate order Plumbaginales, which included no other families. Viola hederacea is a species of violet which is native to Australia. The Volvocaceae are a family of unicellular or colonial biflagellates, including the typical genus Volvox. It is endemic to California, where it is a resident of vernal pools and other moist areas in a number of habitat types. The isotopic contribution of (photo)respiration to stand - scale Delta(obs) was determined with the experimental approach of Tcherkez et al. In Costa Rica, it flowers earlier, with ripe fruit in April. The rounded leaves are pale green. The results confirm the existence of differential traits in the response to drought stress in Mediterranean accessions of tomato, and demonstrate that increases in the g(m)/g(s) ratio would allow improvements in A(N)/g(s) in horticultural crops. The fruit is a legume pod of varying shape containing seeds. Familiar food species include the adzuki bean (V. angularis), the black gram (V. mungo), the cowpea (V. unguiculata, including the variety known as the black - eyed pea), and the mung bean (V. radiata). It has narrow, linear leaves that range in colour from a pale - green to reddish up to 3 feet (1 m) long and up to 0.75 inches broad. The fruit is a red berry which has spots when young. The leaves are oval - shaped. [ 1 ] The tree can grow on serpentine soils. They can be found from tropical lowland forests to montane rainforests. endemic to Central America (Costa Rica, Nicaragua, Honduras). The leaves are pinnate (rarely entire), with one to numerous leaflets. However, JA levels in all plant organs examined increased significantly on mechanical disturbance. It is known for its fragrant flowers, and its timber used in woodworking. Carob bars, an alternative to chocolate bars, as well as carob treats, are often available in health food stores. Acacia cyclops, commonly known as red - eyed wattle or western coastal wattle, is a coastal shrub or small tree in the family Fabaceae. The following species are recognised: Among the closest living relatives of vetches are the lentils (Lens) and the true peas (Pisum). Cirsium is a genus of perennial and biennial flowering plants in the Asteraceae, one of several genera known commonly as thistles. Five pistils, also fused below, have 10 stamens arranged around them. Fernseea is a genus of the botanical family Bromeliaceae, subfamily Bromelioideae, with two known species, both endemic to Brazil. Once it was a genus of Senecio but has recently been reclassified as a Dendrosenecio. The Spanish took control of the area in the 1520s. The name of the genus is derived from the Ancient Greek words συμφορεῖν (sumphoreîn), meaning to bear together , and καρπός (karpós), meaning fruit . Of the two subspecies of this plant, only ssp. thompsoniae occurs throughout the species ' range. The uppermost 3 tepals are connivent into a hood whilst the lateral sepals are almost united. The name of this genus is derived from the Greek words acanthos ( spiny ) and ephippion ( saddle ), referring to the saddle - like labellum of the plants. It is native to Europe, but it can be found on other continents as an introduced species and sometimes a weed, including in North America and Australia. In urban settings, it is often planted in parks for its bright red flowers. Strobilanthes dyeriana (Persian shield) is a tropical plant native to Myanmar. High - performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and enzymatic assays showed that this correlated tightly with the glutathione redox state, pointing to significant in vivo pools of GSSG in cat2 that were unavailable for MCB labelling. Common names include bog - myrtle and sweetgale. Tagetes is a genus of annual or perennial, mostly herbaceous plants in the sunflower family (Asteraceae). These berries contain oxalic acid, which is only very moderately poisonous. Thalassia (plant), a genus of seagrass commonly known as turtle grass Pinellia reproduces rapidly from seed and many species also produce bulbils on the leaves. P.D.Cantino Vriesea sucrei is a plant species in the genus Vriesea. At 28 ° 40′39″S 49 ° 22′11″W, it is located 180 km south of Florianópolis, the state capital and around 900 km south of São Paulo. Plants of this genus can be found in Central and South America, Mexico, California, Hispaniola, and Hawaii, although the species in Hawaii is probably a human introduction. The leaves are deeply three- to five - lobed, 8–15 cm (3–6 in) long, arranged alternately on the stems. Aralia plants vary in size, with some herbaceous species only reaching 50 centimetres (20 in) tall, while some are trees growing to 20 metres (66 ft) tall. & T.Durand) Bremek. Kalmia was named by Linnaeus to honour his friend the botanist Pehr Kalm, who collected it in eastern North America during the mid-18th century. The species grows extensively in East Asia such as south east China and Taiwan preferring ravines, grassy, dry, and sandy areas. Hybrids like Aster Alma Potschke, the famous pink one, will do well almost anywhere in full sun. Cochlianthus is a genus of flowering plants in the legume family, Fabaceae. The small uni - sexual blooms are greenish - white and produced in late spring or early summer. The name is derived from the Greek words pachys ( thick ) and andros ( male ) which is a reference to the thick stamens (the male portion of the flower). Sinensia (one species: Rhododendron molle) The genus Cajanus is a member of the plant family Fabaceae. It is native to large sections of the northern Northern Hemisphere, including Eurasia and North America. The Cabombaceae are a family of aquatic, herbaceous flowering plants. It is widely distributed, occurring in southern Europe, most of Africa and the Middle East through to the Indian subcontinent. Tamarind (Tamarindus indica) is a leguminous tree in the family Fabaceae indigenous to tropical Africa. Masdevallia elephanticeps is a species of orchid occurring at high elevations in the Cordillera Oriental of Colombia. The Hellenes of Kos also claimed Leto as their own. Moringa stenopetala, commonly called the cabbage - tree (along with a number of other species), is a tree in the flowering plant genus Moringa, native to Kenya and Ethiopia. It contracts into the ground during dry periods. This cactus grows on rocky or gravelly limestone substrates. Distributed widely in alpine and arctic environments around the North Atlantic Ocean, it is one of the smallest of woody plants. It was re - discovered by Charles Maries during his visit to Jiangsu in 1878. Flowers, either blue or white, and pods similar to lima beans, are produced on fully developed plants. The flowers are hairy and have an unpleasant odor. Bulbophyllum sandersonii is a species of orchid in the genus Bulbophyllum. The scientific name Piper and the common name pepper are derived from the Sanskrit term pippali, denoting the long pepper (P. longum). Bursa houses the Uludağ University, and its population can claim one of the highest overall levels of education in Turkey. However, the molecular processes underlying lesion development and COR - induced chlorosis are poorly understood. Paspalums are also food for caterpillars of lepidopterans such as the pasture day moth (Apina callisto), and those of the dark palm dart (Telicota ancilla) which feed on P. urvillei. They are evergreen trees native to Africa. Common names include spectacle fruit and jackass clover. The flowers are prominent, large, striated cup- or urn - shaped, fleshy, waxy, and about 4 cm long. Coryanthes macrantha is an epiphytic Orchid from the genus of the Bucket Orchids. It contains only one known species, Evotella rubiginosa, endemic to South Africa. It is among the most probable locations of the fabled ancient Land of Punt. In soil communities sampled from sites along a gradient of invasion history with Alliaria petiolata, microbial richness tended to decline, but the community 's resistance to A. petiolata 's effects generally increased with increasing history of invasion. Abrin, which is chemically similar to the ricin found in castor seeds (see below), sabotages your body 's functions at the cellular level by inactivating ribosomes, the molecular machines in your body responsible for synthesizing proteins. It is a deciduous small shrub growing to 1 m tall. Physiological performance of an Alaskan shrub (Alnus fruticosa) in response to disease (Valsa melanodiscus) and water stress. It can be found growing in temperate regions of the world, in lawns, on roadsides, on disturbed banks and shores of water ways, and other areas with moist soils. The plant dies after it has produced its flowers in summer, but new plants can easily be propagated from the offsets which appear as the parent plant dies. Ephedra is a medicinal preparation from the plant Ephedra sinica. Ingestion of the seeds can lead to burning sensations in the mouth and throat, intense abdominal pain, and bloody diarrhea within 36 hours, and can lead to death within 3 - 5 days if left untreated. This species was considered to be extinct in the wild, with the only living specimens in botanical gardens around the world. Several natural hybrids are also known. Enkianthus is a genus of shrubs or small trees in the heath family (Ericaceae). They are widely lance - shaped and sometimes divided into segments. Geoffroea is a rather small genus of wild spiny shrubs or small trees of tropical and subtropical South America. Decne., known as Pilpil, Voqui, Voquicillo, Voquillo, Voqui blanco in Chile. The entire genus is native to Chile and Argentina. It has the bittersweet aroma of benzaldehyde (which is also characteristic of bitter almonds). I 've found the well - known hybrids, such as “, grow and last as well in a rough meadow environment as they do in fancy gardens. L. pyrenaicus subsp. pyrenaicus lives in the PyreneesA number of authors since 2006, based on molecular evidence, have divided the genus Leontodon into two, with the former subgenus Oporinia split out into the genus Scorzoneroides. Other common names include: old man, boy 's love, oldman wormwood, lover 's plant, appleringie, garderobe, Our Lord 's wood, maid 's ruin, garden sagebrush, European sage, sitherwood and lemon plant. The genus is endemic to subtropical Southeast Asia, from Taiwan west across southern China to Assam in the eastern Himalaya, and south to Vietnam. Magydaris is a genus of perennial herbs in the Apiaceae family, native to western Mediterranean Sea. Believe it or not, this plant is actually part of the mint family – although it does n’t taste anything like mint so we ’d avoid giving it a taste. Pultenaea is a genus of flowering plants in the family Fabaceae - Faboideae that are native to Australia. The plant bears two palmate, hairy leaves with 5–7 double - toothed lobes and single, small, inconspicuous flowers with greenish - white stamens in the late spring. In the APG III system, 35 families are recognized. These plants propagate only by seed. It is a warm - growing epiphyte found in elevations of 900 to 1700 meters. It should include the genera Neogyna and Pholidota, and several sections should be removed, including Cyathogyne, Tomentosae, Rigidiformes, Veitchiae and Verrucosae. Aerva javanica (Burm.f.) It measures up to 1.2 cm (0.47 in) wide. It is often called ryegrass, but this term is sometimes used to refer to grasses in other genera. Their perception as oviposition cues by females would seem to require their occurrence on the leaf surface, yet previous studies have reached opposite conclusions about whether glucosinolates are actually present on the surface of crucifer leaves. While some sources accept several names in Carduncellus, others are more restrictive, and some consider the genus to be synonymous with Carthamus, the genus that includes the safflower. Canarium luzonicum, commonly known as elemi, is a tree native to the Philippines. The Salak (S. zalacca) or snake fruit is the species most widely grown for its fruit ; the firm white pulp has a slight acidic taste. A few rare species also occur in isolated pockets further west in the fynbos vegetation of the Western Cape. The fruit is a whorl of follicles ; the follicles are laterally compressed, stellately radiating, with a more or less elongated apical beak. It is a plant of the coastlines of Europe, especially the British Isles. Common names include Canary Islands - balm, Canary balm, and Balm - of - Gilead. It is a perennial herbaceous plant growing to 1 - 1.5 m tall. It is best known for its flowers. This highlights the need to select for genotypes that resist both acidity and high soil strength. It is one of the parent species of the hybrid Eurybia × herveyi. The seed is small, round and hard, and of an enamel - like, lacquered black. Some other members of the genus, such as Asparagus densiflorus, are grown as ornamental plants. The hairy leaves are compound and 35–60 cm (14–24 in) long, with 11–17 leaflets. Pinus tabuliformis, also called Manchurian red pine, Southern Chinese pine or Chinese red pine, is a pine native to northern China from Liaoning west to Inner Mongolia and Gansu, and south to Shandong, Henan and Shaanxi, and also northern Korea. This may be because of evolutionary changes in the A. petiolata populations, which tend to reduce their investment to allelopathic compounds over time. The plants are native to the tropical and subtropical regions of Africa, Australia, and Asia. They grow to 10–60 cm tall, with a rosette of long, slender leaves 15–75 cm long and 0.5–2 cm broad and thick, fleshy tuberous roots. Bulbophyllum orthoglossum is a species of orchid in the genus Bulbophyllum. The tree is covered in late July and August with masses of large flat white to gray cluster of small white flowers, particularly valued when few other tree - size plants are flowering. It is native to the Canary Islands, but it grows as an introduced species in mainland Europe, especially Spain, and on other continents. The field madder, Sherardia arvensis, is a close relative and may be confused with a tiny bedstraw. The Dasycladaceae is one of the two extant families of green algae of the order Dasycladales. Nevertheless, the family is a genetically supported monophyletic group currently and frequently cited within the Sapindales and is recognized as a sister group to the Anacardiaceae. In traditional, pre - contact Hawaiʻi, it was Milu who was the god of the Underworld and death, not Kanaloa ; the related Miru traditions of other Polynesian cultures support this. Maricao (B. spicata) is the namesake tree and floral emblem of Maricao, Puerto Rico, and figured on the coat of arms of this city. They are native to West and Central North America. Tsuga heterophylla, the western hemlock or western hemlock - spruce, is a species of hemlock native to the west coast of North America, with its northwestern limit on the Kenai Peninsula, Alaska, and its southeastern limit in northern Sonoma County, California. Local increases in the abundance of wiregrasses is a good indicator of overgrazing, as livestock avoid them. Philotheca myoporoides, commonly known as long - leaf wax flower, is a shrub in the family Rutaceae. Some species are native to Europe, others to North America and South America (especially in the Andes). The lower leaves are divided into large, leaflike segments up to 4 or 5 centimeters long and a lobed oval in shape. Members of the genus typically bear flowers each with a calyx six to fourteen millimeters in length, five styles and five carpels. Most are evergreen long - lived perennial plants growing from the understory as lianas, bushes or climbing plants. The seeds in this genus are notable for being deeply pitted. Matsum. Sarracenia psittacina, also known as the parrot pitcherplant, is a carnivorous plant in the genus Sarracenia. It has also recently been grown in planted aquaria. This represents a change from the APG system, of 1998, which did not recognize Barbeuiaceae as a family. It is usually treated as the only genus in the family Grossulariaceae, but a few taxonomists place the gooseberry species in a separate genus of Grossularia. —a large one, Wallarie, and a small one, Kondola. The sole species, Ixanthus viscosus, is endemic to Canary Islands laurel fields and displays small yellow flowers when in bloom. This species in native to Mexico, Central America, Colombia, Venezuela, the West Indies, and Florida. The bulbs are an important and preferred food of the grizzly bear. Glycinebetaine protects plants against abiotic stress: mechanisms and biotechnological applications. The name means lion 's ear . Known as Corone by the Venetians and Ottomans, the town of Koroni (pop. The flowers are inconspicuous. A fundamental, eco - hydrological basis for niche segregation in plant communities. Hacquetia epipactis (syn. Dondia epipactis Spreng.) The flowers are bisexual, with a hypanthium that is narrows at the top, uncompressed below the tepals, 6 tepals are usually erect and equal, the inner surface without papillae. The genus name is derived from the Greek words ὑμήν (hymen), meaning membrane , and καλός (kalos), meaning beautiful . The specific epithet moranensis refers to its type location, Mina de Moran. The plant ’s unique round leaves create a dramatic impression, which is why it ’s best to house Chinese money plants in a simple pot. Schizaea is a small genus of specialized ferns in the family Schizaeaceae. To identify host factors essential for viral infection, we screened a progeny population of EMS (ethyl methanesulfonate)-mutagenized Arabidopsis expressing a MP17:GFP fusion for suppressor mutants with restored wild type - like phenotype. Several species, such as Commelina benghalensis, are eaten as a leaf vegetable in Southeast Asia and Africa. Botrychium is a genus of ferns, seedless vascular plants in the family Ophioglossaceae. This variety of grass is different from the species commonly known as buffalo grass (Stenotaphrum secundatum) in Australia. More recent publications consider subsp. candidum to be a distinct species, called Erythronium idahoense. The plant grows in full sunlight, and is hardy down to −15 ° C (5 ° F). The fronds are 0.5–4 cm long and broad, with a bristly surface caused by the hair - like strands that join at the end to form eggbeater shapes. The forms range from annual plants lying on the ground, to well - developed tall trees. The Romans may have seen the first dining klinai as used by the Etruscans but may have refined the practice when they later came to closer contact with the Greek culture. M. gonavensis of Haiti and M. spectabilis of Costa Rica are almost extinct. This is wonderful ! It is a shrub or small tree that grows to 3–7 m in height, with leathery leaves that are narrowly elliptic or oblong - lanceolate, 8–13 by 2–4 cm in size. There are 30 recognised Durio species, at least nine of which produce edible fruit. The anthers are basifixed, and the leaves are arranged in whorls. Psiloxylon mauritianum (known locally as bois bigaignon ) is a species of flowering plant, the sole species of genus Psiloxylon. They are known commonly as groundcones and they are native to western North America and extreme northeastern Asia. The species in this genus are the most well - known of the parasitic catfishes also known as candiru, known for their alleged habit of entering the human urethra. Johnson grass or Johnsongrass, Sorghum halepense, is a plant in the grass family, Poaceae, native to the Mediterranean region, but grows throughout Europe and the Middle East. Adenopodia is a genus of legume in the Fabaceae family, that occurs in the northern Neotropics and Africa. The wood is dark orange brown, heavy, hard, close - grained, with a density of 0.7303. Three species develop bullate leaves which are hollow root - filled structures. Both Lamprocampnos and Corydalis are members of the Papaveraceae family, with seeds having an attached elaiosome that makes them attractive to ants, which disperse the seeds. Phyteuma is a genus of flowering plants in the family Campanulaceae, native to Europe and Morocco. The common name is Rampion, a name shared with the related plant Campanula rapunculus. Weeping Fig: Although a little harder to care for, the weeping fig is a great option for the home environment. The name photinia also continues to be used for several species of small trees in the mountains of Mexico and Central America which had formerly been included in the genus Photinia. The hydraulic conductance of angiosperm xylem has been suggested to vary with changes in sap solute concentrations because of intervessel pit properties. Myrtus communis, the common myrtle, is a species of flowering plant in the myrtle family Myrtaceae. Its distribution is limited to the Western Mediterranean, mainly found in Portugal and Spain on the European mainland. It is native to Bangladesh, India, China and Malaysia, and has also been introduced to the US states of Florida, Texas and possibly Virginia. Sulfur compounds in the young shoots are also considered at least partially responsible for mild skin reactions in some people who handle the plant. These are four of the fourteen or fifteen families in the order Saxifragales. T. oahuensis and T. lydgatei are called ʻohe mauka. The species flowers between August and October. The ' Rubra ' varieties exhibit intensely deep rose lips with very large dark spots on petals and sepals, these spots often coalescing to appear almost solid deep chocolate brown. When Dracontium plants begin to flower, the tuber swells and smoothens. They display the unique (or nearly so depending on interpretation) condition in the bamboos of having the ability to give rise to branches from multiple equal primary branch buds at their nodes. It is found in tropical America. It is one of the first markers of spring on a farm, even germinating before some of the early wild plants like Catmint and Dock. Chimonobambusa is a genus of East Asian bamboo in the grass family. It is tolerant of grazing and regenerates following occasional burning, and is often managed in nature reserves and grouse moors by sheep or cattle grazing, and also by light burning. Orthilia secunda is a flowering plant of the genus Orthilia in the family Ericaceae. Vulnerability to cavitation was negatively related to the Huber - value and leaf dry matter content, and positively with leaf size. A PCR - based approach was initially employed to screen truffles for the presence of the MAT1 - 2 - 1 gene and amplify the conserved regions flanking the mating type (MAT) locus. Teucrium botrys, the cutleaf germander or cut - leaved germander is a low to short downy annual, sometimes biennial, plant. Bunium bulbocastanum is a plant species in the family Apiaceae. Graptopetalum paraguayense is a species of succulent plant in the jade plant family, Crassulaceae, that is native to Tamaulipas, Mexico. It is endemic to California, where it grows in the moist forests of the Coast Ranges. The flowers are the most striking feature, being sweetly fragrant white trumpets up to 20 cm (7.9 in) long, sometimes tinted purple, especially at the margin. Coreopsis lanceolata, the Lance - leaved coreopsis, is a North American species of Tickseed in the sunflower family. First described in 1774, the mushroom has a wide distribution in the Northern Hemisphere, where it grows on the ground in damp woodlands in a mycorrhizal association with conifers, especially pine. Under anoxic conditions, an additional set of TFs is induced. It has been involved in the majority of human deaths from mushroom poisoning, possibly including the deaths of Roman Emperor Claudius in AD 54 and Holy Roman Emperor Charles VI in 1740. They are characterised by their zygomorphic flowers and by the involucral bracts called spathes that surround the flower stalks. Nitrophila is a small genus of flowering plants in the amaranth family sometimes known by the common name niterworts. Cordaites hislopii. In taxonomy, Bambusina is a genus of fresh - water green algae, specifically of the Desmidiaceae. Asphodelus is a genus of mainly perennial plants first described for modern science in 1753. It includes several species of plants known commonly as pitchersages (also pitcher sages). It is considered a pest in this region as it colonises waterways and forms dense masses of vegetation on the surface, threatening native biodiversity, although in its native areas it is rarely dominant. He was a munshi who took a keen interest in natural history and under the training of Falconer, Royle and Edgeworth had become a proficient botanist who compiled a vernacular flora of northern India and the Himalayas which was however never published. We 've enjoyed great bloom from the old daylilies in wet spots, dry spots — almost anywhere. It is a bulbous perennial growing to 45 cm (18 in). It is subdivided into twenty - three provinces (Spanish: provincias, singular provincia) and one autonomous city (ciudad autónoma), Buenos Aires, which is the federal capital of the nation (Spanish: Capital Federal) as decided by Congress. The four species endemic to North America are called rattlesnake plantain . Thermopsis rhombifolia, also known as prairie thermopsis, is a flowering plant in the legume family. It is widespread in much of the Old World Tropics in Asia, Africa, Australia, and various oceanic islands. It produces short, 2 to 4 flowered racemes, fragrant, waxy, and highly variable in color, arising from the upper nodes of leafed and leafless canes. Arachnothryx is a genus of flowering plants in the Rubiaceae family. The species originated in western South America. It is one of the species that compose the tortoise turf , the food source of the Aldabra giant tortoise, of the Aldabra Atoll in the Seychelles. Hydriastele is a diverse and widespread genus of flowering plant in the palm family found throughout Australia and New Zealand, Melanesia, Polynesia, and Southeast Asia. Pitcairnia is a genus of the botanical family Bromeliaceae, subfamily Pitcairnioideae. Ranzania (Japanese: トガクシソウ) is a monotypic genus of perennial herbs in the family Berberidaceae, the only species is Ranzania japonica. It grows in habitats such as dry forests and the thin soil around rock outcrops. It was formerly included within a broader interpretation of the genus Sophora. In all, the family contains 3 genera and 50 to 80 species with most of those belonging to Marsilea. Conophytum jucundum is a species of succulent plants belonging to the Aizoaceae family. Its fronds can reach 3 m (10 ft) long. Hemerocallis citrina, common names citron daylily and long yellow day lily, is a species of herbaceous perennial plant in the family Asphodelaceae. Sparaxis (harlequin flower) is a genus in the family Iridaceae with about 13 species endemic to Cape Province, South Africa. Leaves are non - compound, moderately thick and slightly leathery, usually with 3 lobes, the central lobe much larger than the 2 small flanking lobes. They are native to Australia, Malesia and New Caledonia. + Laburnocytisus adamii (also known as Adam 's laburnum or broom laburnum) is a horticultural curiosity ; a small tree which is a graft - chimaera between two species, a laburnum, Laburnum anagyroides, and a broom, Chamaecytisus purpureus (syn. Cytisus purpureus), which bears some shoots typical of the one species, some of the other, and some which are a peculiar mixture of both parents . The trees accumulate dead fronds or leaves, which when the plant is in cultivation are often removed by a arborist. They are noted for their large and apparently leafy inflorescences, up to 1.5 m (4.9 ft) across. The upper surface of the pinnules bear the sessile capsules. The genus is pantropical, occurring in Asia, Africa, Madagascar, America and Australia, but mostly in the Old World tropics. Pseudorchis is a monotypic genus of flowering plants from the orchid family, Orchidaceae. It formerly also was found on the small islets of St Pierre, Chauve - Souris and Ile Ronde (Round Island), all located near Praslin, but had become extinct there for a time until recently reintroduced. Tinantia is native to North and South America from Texas + Hispaniola to Argentina, with a center of diversity from Mexico to Nicaragua. ), rather than use formal names such as subclass Asteridae. It is native to the desert and coastal regions of the US states of California and Arizona and the Mexican states of Baja California and Sonora. Hibiscus diversifolius (Swamp Hibiscus) is a widespread species of hibiscus. Dodecatheon alpinum is a perennial plant in the primrose family, Primulaceae, known by the common name alpine shooting star. This wildflower is native to the Western United States, in California, Arizona, Nevada, Oregon, and Utah. We show that Arabidopsis root epidermal cells are readily transformed by co - cultivation with Agrobacterium and are tractable for quantitative electrophysiological analysis. Nidularium is a genus of the botanical family Bromeliaceae, subfamily Bromelioideae. It grows in well - drained, loamy or sandy soils. Cymbidium, or boat orchid, is a genus of 52 evergreen species in the orchid family Orchidaceae. The seedpods of the plant often bend the stalks down to the ground where they have a better chance of propagating a new generation of plants. Polytoma is a genus of green algae in the family Chlamydomonadaceae. It is a widespread species found in a variety of open habitats, such as prairies and woodlands. Taxonomy for this genus is currently being reanalysed, with the genus Hebe and the related Australasian genera Derwentia, Detzneria, Chionohebe, Heliohebe, Leonohebe and Parahebe now included by many botanists. Plants were exposed to a range of water stresses, causing up to 90 % leaf death, by withholding water and then rewatering to observe the recovery process. One plant can produce several yellow flower heads, each containing as many as 40 disc florets but no ray florets. It can be found from Costa Rica to northern Chile. & Arn.) Physiological and morphological adaptations in relation to water use efficiency in Mediterranean accessions of Solanum lycopersicum. Diplomeris is a genus of flowering plants from the orchid family, Orchidaceae. It has trifoliate leaves, deep rose purple blossoms and yellowish white prickles on the petioles and stems. It native to tropical Africa, China, the Indian Subcontinent, Southeast Asia, Papuasia, and Australia. Asteranthera is a genus of plants in the family Gesneriaceae, native to the humid forests of Argentina and Chile, it is a species of evergreen scrambling vine. Opisthiolepis is a genus of a sole described species of large trees, constituting part of the plant family Proteaceae. Corytoplectus is a genus in the plant family Gesneriaceae. Micromeria × angosturae P.Pérez Gran Canaria in the Canary Islands (M. tenuis subsp. linkii × M. varia subsp. canariensis) Understanding salt tolerance mechanisms will contribute to the discovery of new traits which may enhance the breeding efforts towards improved performance of legumes in marginal agricultural environments. The rationale for some of the common names is unclear, as they include examples normally applied to unrelated plants, including twining parasites (e.g. Flowers are white or yellowish to violet - rose, with greenish or purple flecks. Salvia viridis (annual clary, orval) is an annual plant native to an area extending from the Mediterranean to the Crimea and into Iran. It is a rhizomatous herbaceous perennial growing to 10 cm (4 in). They are native to Southeast Asia, China, Taiwan, the Himalayas, New Guinea, Melanesia, and the Northern Territory of Australia. Ancathia is a genus of flowering plants in the daisy family. The only known species is Ancathia igniaria, native to Mongolia, Xinjiang, Altay, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, and Azerbaijan. Stichorkis is a genus of orchids native to the Indian subcontinent, Southeast Asia, New Guinea, and various islands of the Pacific and Indian Oceans. The only negative experience I have had with this beautiful herb is with intense rainfall, the huge plant can flop apart with the weight of water soaked flowers. Osmanthus heterophyllus (Chinese: t 柊樹, s 柊树, p zhongshu ; Japanese: 柊, Hiiragi), variously known as holly osmanthus, holly olive, and false holly, is a species of flowering plant in the olive family Oleaceae, native to eastern Asia in central and southern Japan (Honshū, Kyūshū, Shikoku, and the Ryukyu Islands) and Taiwan. Plants can escape from specific environmental stresses through active growth strategies. Some species are important in ethnomedicine ; a number (usually island endemics) are threatened species, with one species and one variety being completely extinct already. In its native range, the plant has a number of uses besides flavoring. Check out more uses with Fennel: A molecular clock analysis estimated its divergence from its closest relatives in the Early Miocene, likely pre - dating the age of Guadalupe Island. It is a deciduous shrub, that is most notable for producing purple drupes (its berries ) in the fall. The genus is native to southwestern North America from western Texas to New Mexico and Arizona in the United States, and south through Chihuahua, Coahuila and Nuevo León in northern Mexico. The leaves are ovate to elliptic, green to dark green, with a pattern of fine wrinkles. The last collection of the plant on the island was in 1875, so the species and the genus must now be presumed extinct. Some species are cultivated as ornamentals or used in herbal medicine for inducing relaxation and sleep. The genus name is a combination of three Greek words meaning a- ' without ', koilos ' hollow ', and rhaphis ' needle ', an allusion to the form of the fruit. It has long been cultivated for its carnivorous nature and attractive flowers, and is one of the most common butterworts in cultivation. Watermelon is grown in tropical and subtropical areas worldwide for its large edible fruit, also known as a watermelon, which is a special kind of berry with a hard rind and no internal division, botanically called a pepo. Lamarckia is a Eurasian and African plant in the grass family. nor to the cooking plantain (Musa × paradisiaca) Goldenseal is used to control muscle spasms, treat cancer, stimulate the heart and increase blood pressure, treat gastrointestinal disorders, treat conjunctivitis, manage painful and heavy menstruation, treat infections topically, reduce swelling and alleviate edema. April 1 is celebrated as Odisha Day (Utkala Dibasa). The APG II system (2003 ; unchanged from the APG system of 1998), recognizes this family and assigns it to the order Caryophyllales in the clade core eudicots. It has gained the Royal Horticultural Society 's Award of Garden Merit. It is also found further east, all the way to the Atlantic coast of the United States and Canada, but is much less common beyond the Great Plains and is restricted to specialized habitats. The plant is considered a noxious weed in parts of the Pacific Northwest. Centromadia pungens is an herb up to 120 cm (48 inches) tall. Its range extends from southern Mississippi, through southern Alabama, the Florida panhandle and Georgia, to the coastal plains of Virginia and South Carolina. It is not to be confused with its American relative Prunus caroliniana, which is also called cherry laurel. Annuals or herbaceous perennials, they are cultivated for their fern - like leaves on creeping, radiating stems and daisy - like flowers. See grape and raisin toxicity in dogs. Thomasia is a genus of plants which are native to southern Australia. The type species of this genus is Paphiopedilum insigne. Vicia is a genus of about 140 species of flowering plants that are part of the legume family (Fabaceae), and which are commonly known as vetches. Platostoma palustre, commonly known as Chinese mesona, is a species of plants belonging to the genus Platostoma of the mint family. In other European countries, including their native Italy, Baltimora enjoyed more success. Ludisia is a genus of orchids that contains just one species, Ludisia discolor, commonly referred to as jewel orchid. Members of this genus are trees that grow to about 25 metres (82 ft). Sinowilsonia is a monotypic genus of plant containing the single species Sinowilsonia henryi. It was originally classified in the family Sterculiaceae, which is now within Malvaceae. The plant was named in honour of Harry Veitch, of the Veitch Nurseries family, by whose plant - hunters it was discovered in 1867, and who imported, cultivated, and first flowered this species. Long considered the national treasure of Peru, it is rumoured to have been cultivated by the Incas centuries ago, who called the plant waqanki. Asteridae is an obsolete botanical name at the rank of subclass. Groundcones often look at first glance like pine cones lying on the ground, especially when they are brown in color. Navarretia squarrosa (skunkbush, skunkweed, or California stinkweed) is a spreading annual plant from North America which is noted for its skunk - like odour. They are widespread and common in temperate regions, although some are found on tropical mountains or in the subtropical regions of the world. sheets of the Mont Cenis bellflower (Campanula cenisia), of the palest blue imaginable, covering high screes in the Graian Alps where nothing else would grow. Some species, such as bahiagrass (P. notatum) and P. nicorae, are grown for pasturage, especially with the perennial forage peanut (Arachis glabrata) as a companion crop. Acacia terminalis (sunshine wattle) is a shrub or small tree to 6 m in height. There are 14 species in Australia, 21 in New Caledonia and 7 in the other Pacific Islands, including Hawaiʻi. The leaves are opposite or in whorls of three to seven. Lagunaria is a monotypic genus in the family Malvaceae. The concentration of mannitol was determined by gas chromatography. Helianthella quinquenervis, fivenerve helianthella, is a North American plant species in the sunflower family. The majority of species are robust plants that grow readily in cultivation. Plants in this genus share similarities with those in both Darwinia and Verticordia. In section Acanthodium, there are 13–15 species that use the C4 carbon fixation pathway. It has ovate, deeply - lobed leaves with whitish veins, atop stems that are 1–2 cm thick. We could n’t have a list of 10 strange named plants without including the Corpse Flower. Laccosperma is a clustering genus of flowering plant in the family palm found in tropical Africa. Mitracarpus is a plant genus in the coffee family Rubiaceae. The fruit is a flattened, brown, velvety, bean - like pod 5–10 cm long with thick disk - like seeds around 1 cm in diameter spaced evenly inside ; they mature in summer and crack and twist open to release the seeds ; the empty pods often persist until winter. Lycopus europaeus, common names gypsywort, gipsywort, bugleweed, European bugleweed and water horehound, is a perennial plant in the genus Lycopus, native to Europe and Asia, and naturalized elsewhere. Convolvulus arvensis (field bindweed) is a species of bindweed in the morning glory family (Convolvulaceae), native to Europe and Asia. Lysimachia () is a genus consisting of 193 accepted species of flowering plants traditionally classified in the family Primulaceae. Not only is it a wonderful addition to your cooking (especially paired with garlic) but it also has enough medicinal properties to fill several books. The male (pollen) cones are 2 cm long, shedding pollen in spring. Tillandsia circinnatoides is a species in the genus Tillandsia. Erasanthe is a genus of epiphytic orchids. Foxtail millet (Chinese: 小米 ; botanic name Setaria italica, synonym Panicum italicum L.) is an annual grass grown for human food. Gongrospermum is a monotypic plant genus of Sapindaceae endemic to the Philippines, on Luzon. Some species have synonymy in genus Abutilon. Hymenocardia is a genus of trees in the family Phyllanthaceae first described as a genus in 1836. Phyllocladus, the celery pines, is a small genus of conifers, now usually treated in the family Podocarpaceae. Its natural habitats are rocky areas and hot deserts. Pauridiantha liebrechtsiana, (De Wild. It was described by Stephan Ladislaus Endlicher and Eduard Friedrich Poeppig in 1836. Mule deer readily eat the foliage. The Ktunaxa name for glacier lily is maxa. Flora of North America recognizes two subspecies, the yellow - flowered subsp. grandiflorum and the white- to cream - flowered subsp. candidum. Masdevallia veitchiana, (pronounced veech - e - anna ) also known as Veitch 's masdevallia or king of the masdevallias, is an orchid species of the genus Masdevallia. It was named for Antonio Condal, an 18th Spanish physician. Iris halophila var. sogdiana is a species in the genus Iris, it is also in the subgenus Limniris and in series Spuriae. All the pieces which do not look farinaceous, but watery when broken, arc thrown away ; the others, by strokes of the Kondola, are united by twos or threes, and put into the fire again ; they are then taken out and pounded together in the form of a cake, which is again Anartia is a genus of butterflies in family Nymphalidae, and subfamily Nymphalinae, found in tropical and subtropical areas in the Americas. Although not a member of Salvia, the genus of other plants commonly called sage, it is closely related to them. Under the Empire, children were celebrated on coins, as was Juno Lucina, the primary goddess of childbirth, as well as in public art. Flower color is white or near - white with purple blotches and spots. First removed from the genus Solanum by Philip Miller in 1754, its removal leaves the latter genus paraphyletic, so modern botanists generally accept the names in Solanum. The plant is native to northern North America and parts of Eurasia, its circumpolar distribution extending across Canada and the northern United States to Greenland, Iceland and northern Europe. Paul G.Wilson The female flowers have pink/ red pistils. Sci. The end result ? Creeping thymes come in many scents and colors. Gardening enthusiasts and professional horticulturalists have long bred daylily species for their attractive flowers. Sambucus is a genus of flowering plants in the family Adoxaceae. Xylopia aethiopica is an evergreen, aromatic tree, of the Annonaceae family that can grow up to 20 m high. They are mostly leaf - climbing lianas with slender, reedy stems. It is known as giroflée and ravenelle in French, Goldlack in German, alhelí in Spanish and violacciocca in Italian. They are seen as one of two most probable sister groups to land plant species, the second candidate group being the Characeae. M. richardsiana is the most common and well known. Oxandra is a genus of flowering plants in the soursop family, Annonaceae. The genus name is derived from the Ancient Greek terms atractos spindle , and karpos fruit , from the spindle - shaped fruit of the type species. The leaves are alternate, leathery, glossy dark green, simple, 3–9 cm (1.2–3.5 in) long, with an entire or serrated margin. It is resistant to termites and wood - rotting fungi. bearing small, white, scented flowers, which is grown as an ornamental tree or hedge. This tree grows abundantly in the Florida Keys and can also be found in various ecosystems in southern Florida. Dyckia remotiflora is a species in the genus Dyckia. ; other synonyms include Podocarpus ustus (Vieill.) It is sometimes confused with other closely related genera, Aster and the true daisy Bellis. It is named from 2 Greek words meaning ' covered ' and ' calyx '. Byblis is a small genus of carnivorous plants, sometimes termed the rainbow plants for the attractive appearance of their mucilage - covered leaves in bright sunshine. Cystodium is a fern genus in its own Cystodiaceae family. It is found on coastal areas and sub - coastal ranges from Newcastle in New South Wales northwards to west of Daintree in Queensland, mainly on flat land and lower slopes, where it is the dominant tree of wet forests and on the margins of rain forests. This sundew has a large range and occurs naturally throughout Southeast Asia, in southern China and Japan, Micronesia, New Guinea through to the eastern territories of Australia and Tasmania and New Zealand. Two varieties are recognized, of which Bothriochloa ischaemum var. ischaemum is native to Europe, Asia, and Africa and naturalized elsewhere, and var. songarica is native to Asia and naturalized elsewhere. Like all the Sarracenia, it is native to North America, in the Southeastern United States. However, very early metabolic response has not yet been investigated. The flowers are bell- or tube - shaped and produce capsules with black seeds. Little bluestem is a perennial bunchgrass and is prominent in tallgrass prairie, along with big bluestem (Andropogon gerardi), indiangrass (Sorghastrum nutans) and switchgrass (Panicum virgatum). The myria ’s symbol of my ultimately led to its demise. Requiring a minimum temperature of 15 ° C (59 ° F), in temperate zones it must be grown under glass. All three genera were included in tribe Gloxinieae in the classification system of Hans Wiehler but are now recognized in their own tribe, Sinningieae. The New Zealand Sophora species are known as kowhai or kōwhai. The family is recognized by the Angiosperm Phylogeny Website, based on work since the publication of the APG III system. The genus is related to Gonatostylis, endemic to New Caledonia. Some of the plants are sticky, and all have seeds which become gluey when wet. The Tanzhe Temple west of Beijing, China is named for this tree. These herbs are nearly cosmopolitan (lacking in eastern Asia and tropical regions), with a center of diversity in western North America. Molecular clock calculations estimate the origin of stem group Malpighiales at around 100 million years ago (Mya) and the origin of crown group Malpighiales at about 90 Mya. The Malpighiales are divided into 32 to 42 families, depending upon which clades in the order are given the taxonomic rank of family. In India the galls are called Majuphal among many other names. Schumacher and Peter Thonning, this is a synonym of Alchornea. = Pseudocaryopteris bicolor (Roxb. Opinions differ about the number of species in Brexia. It is one of the species considered a Japanese iris. Common names include sweetscented marigold, Mexican marigold, Mexican mint marigold, Mexican tarragon, Spanish tarragon, sweet mace, Texas tarragon, pericón, yerbaniz, and hierbanís. The inflorescences are coiled spikes of white flowers with fuzzy or bristly sepals. Bauera is a small genus of shrubs which are endemic to eastern Australia. Another species is used today as a bulking agent in garam masala of traditional Indian cuisine. P. tenella yields small almond - like hairy fruits with characteristic flavor. Their ovate pseudobulbs carry from the top one long, plicate, elliptic leaf. At least two species are widely naturalized elsewhere, including Europe, California, Argentina, and Australia. is a flowering plant in the family Iridaceae, native to Southern Africa and Zimbabwe. Bulbophyllum bittnerianum is a species of orchid in the genus Bulbophyllum. Known generally as spineflowers, they are closely related to genus Chorizanthe. Neoregelia marmorata is a species in the genus Neoregelia. Arbutus xalapensis, commonly known as the Texas madrone, naked Indian tree or Texas madroño, is a species of flowering plant in the heather family. Other common names include snowbell, dewdrop, and St. Agnes ' flower. It is sold as gobo root and is quite inexpensive. It has long been cultivated as an ornamental plant. It contains about 50 species. Collectively known as fig trees or figs, they are native throughout the tropics with a few species extending into the semi - warm temperate zone. The plant produces a tall inflorescence originating from the subterranean pseudobulb that continues to produce flowers over several months. The latter mutant showed changes in glucosinolate profiles different from those in the ipmdh1 mutant. This was likely a Lobelia - like species that arrived about 13 million years ago, when Gardner Pinnacles and French Frigate Shoals were high islands and long before the current main islands existed. Callicoma, is a plant genus that contains just one species, Callicoma serratifolia, a tall shrub or small tree which is native to Australia. It can be found throughout much of the temperate world where it has naturalized. Some, notably T. cistoides, T. longipetalus, T. terrestris, and T. zeyheri, are considered weeds. It is native to every Australian State except Queensland, and is also naturalised on the South Island of New Zealand. Domesticated carrots are cultivars of a subspecies, Daucus carota subsp. sativus. The known wild populations are diploid except for some tetraploids in eastern Asia, while the cultivated plants are sterile triploids, probably of hybrid origin between the diploid and tetraploid forms. It is native to southern Africa. Eremaea (moth), a genus of moths in the family Lasiocampinae This shrub is often planted by landscapers and as part of roadside wildflower programs. (1993) and then as Schedonorus giganteus (L.) Holub (1998). Crayfish plague, Aphanomyces astaci, is a water mold that infects crayfish, most notably the European Astacus which dies within a few weeks of being infected. The seeds are rough, black, wingless, 3–8 mm long and wide, 1–2 mm thick ; they ripen in 6–8 weeks. Distributed throughout the Wheatbelt region it also extends in the south west of the Goldfields - Esperance region of Western Australia. There are two recognised subspecies: Dasypogonaceae is a family of flowering plants. Recent molecular studies have supported the separation of Alsobia from Episcia. The fruit of these species is cultivated and eaten as a vegetable. Common names include prickly ash and Hercules club . The South American species C. ruscifolia is an evergreen climber known as deu or huique, and its fruits are used in Southern Chile to make rat poison. Phalaris is a genus of grasses. Elymus hystrix, known as eastern bottlebrush grass, or bottle - brush - grass, is a bunchgrass in the grass family, Poaceae. Depending on the author, there are said to be 100 to 170 species within this genus, second only in number to the genus Ficus within Moraceae. It was imported to England by Thomas Lobb, the collector for Veitch Nurseries, from the western part of Java in 1846. Branchlets emerge from the stems and each bears a cylindrical flower which opens at the end into a star - shaped white or pale purple flower with five ray florets. The series consists of thirteen games that were released on almost every Nintendo video game console. Its closest relative is Pseudophyllanthus. Vriesea scalaris is a species in the genus Vriesea. The total variation in LMA (coefficient of variation (CV) = 21.14 %) was twice that of WD (CV = 10.52 %). Kallstroemia is a genus of flowering plants in the caltrop family, Zygophyllaceae. The genus contains only one species, viz. Brimeura amethystina, the amethyst hyacinth, is a flowering plant of the asparagus family Asparagaceae, native to the Northern Pyrenees and north east Spain. According to recent research, it was first domesticated in China around 6000 BC. It has been sunk into synonymy with Machaonia. Botanists will tell you that members of the genus Brugmansia get their nickname, Angel 's Trumpet, from their large, hanging, trumpet - shaped flowers, which can measure up to 50 cm long and 35 cm wide at their openings. During the Middle Ages, several powerful Somali empires dominated the regional trade, including the Ajuran Empire, the Adal Sultanate, the Warsangali Sultanate, and the Sultanate of the Geledi. Catnip: Catmint, the most famous type of which is catnip, is often grown for its beautiful ornamental properties, though feline owners may have additional motives. They 're hardy as oaks, and give you more and more flowers every summer. Crocuses are native to woodland, scrub, and meadows from sea level to alpine tundra in central and southern Europe, North Africa and the Middle East, on the islands of the Aegean, and across Central Asia to Xinjiang Province in western China. Its name means green pole or stick in Spanish, referring to the green trunk and branches, that perform photosynthesis. It grows in any well - drained soil which dries out in summer ; hence it is often used for underplanting deciduous trees which provide the necessary conditions. All but one of the known species are native to Venezuela, a few occurring in neighboring Guyana and northern Brazil).The genus name is for Carl Axel Magnus Lindman, Swedish botanist (1856 - 1928). First 3 to 6 years growth is slow, after this stage it is a fast - growing tree. The genus has a wide distribution primarily in the tropics and subtropics, but with three species extending north into temperate regions, one (C. retusus) in eastern Asia and two (C. virginicus and C. henryae) in eastern North America. It grows in limestone crevices on the canyon walls, often on the north face. Espeletia, commonly known as ' frailejones ', is a genus of perennial subshrubs, in the sunflower family. It is found in several types of mountain and desert habitat, including chaparral, woodland, and scrub, mostly from 2,000–7,000 feet (600–2,100 m) elevation. It was in the former Myrsinaceae family now recognised as the myrsine sub - family Myrsinoideae. The inflorescence bears several flowers, each on a short pedicel. The narrow leaves are up to 40 centimeters long and may grow erect or spread out along the ground. Misbrookea is a genus of South American plants in the groundsel tribe within the sunflower family. Jasmonic acid (JA) is a plant signalling compound that has been implicated in the regulation of mutualistic symbioses. Ensete ventricosum, commonly known as the Ethiopian banana, Abyssinian banana, false banana, enset or ensete, is an herbaceous species of flowering plant in the banana family Musaceae. Pauridiantha letestuana, (De Wild. Bassia scoparia (syn. Kochia scoparia) is a large annual herb in the family Chenopodiaceae native to Eurasia. Lasianthus alatus Aublet is a misspelling of Lisyanthus alatus Aublet, a species now placed in Chelonanthus. A seed high - lysine trait is negatively associated with the TCA cycle and slows down Arabidopsis seed germination. Both species are native to Cameroon and adjacent countries. Medusandra was named by John Brenan in 1952. Caulostramina jaegeri is a hardy woody perennial herb bearing hairless green leaves and white to pale purple flowers with spoon - shaped, purple - streaked petals. These suggest that compromised auxin biosynthesis / IAA level under HT condition results in nuclear and organellar DNA proliferation arrest due to co - transcriptional alterations. Cells of Chlorodendrales are completely covered in scales, which fuse around the cell body producing the theca, but remain individually separated on the flagella, of which there are typically four per cell. Thaumatococcus daniellii is a plant species from Africa, known for being the natural source of thaumatin, an intensely sweet protein which is of interest in the development of sweeteners. Another fabulous companion herb for tomatoes, chives not only help the tomato 's taste, they season tomato dishes just wonderfully. The largest genera are Capparis (about 150 species), Maerua (about 100 species), Boscia (37 species) and Cadaba (30 species). The leaf petiole is 1–1.2 m (3.3–3.9 ft) long, and has orange, curved, sharp teeth along the edges. Here, we show that DNA proliferation in mitochondria, chloroplasts and nuclei of developing panicles is inhibited with increasing temperatures in barley. Most Prunus fruit and seeds are commonly used in processing, such as jam production, canning, drying or roasting. The fruit of most other species are also edible though they are usually of only local economic importance or eaten as bushfood. They flower from October to December. It is because of this trapping mechanism that some species have been suspected of carnivory, even as early as 1893. The showy part of the flower consists of sepals, not petals. Moullava is a genus of flowering plants in the legume family, Fabaceae. The leaves are pinnately lobed and spiny. Diora (or Deora) was a medieval Bishop of Rochester. The flowers are inconspicuous, greenish - white, 5 mm diameter. The genus was named in honor of Jean Ruelle, herbalist and physician to Francis I of France and translator of several works of Dioscorides. In the United States, the kentia palm is often used in Florida and California in tropical plantings because it closely resembles the coconut palm, which can only grow in the warmest parts of Florida. The leaves are lanceolate, flat, dark green, 1–3 cm long and 2–3 mm broad, arranged spirally on the stem, but with the leaf bases twisted to align the leaves in two flattish rows either side of the stem except on erect leading shoots where the spiral arrangement is more obvious. The protein content is higher than that of wheat, although the glutenin fraction is less. It grows mainly in mesotrophic to eutrophic lakes, ponds and ditches, rarely in brackish water. These fronds are produced in pairs also with a third modified root - like frond that hangs in the water. Molecular events of apical bud formation in white spruce, Picea glauca. Tobacco is the most widely grown commercial non - food plant in the world. Red deer have been introduced to other areas, including Australia, New Zealand, United States, Canada, Peru, Uruguay, Chile and Argentina. Trillium kurabayashii, the giant purple wakerobin, is a species of flowering plants native to southwestern Oregon and northern California. Trillium kurabayashii is a perennial herb spreading by means of underground rhizomes. Like all morning glories the plant entwines itself around structures, growing to a height of 2–3 metres (6 ft 7 in–9 ft 10 in) tall. This plant has gained the Royal Horticultural Society 's Award of Garden Merit. Known cultivars include the variegated ‘ Thor’. Planctonema is a genus of green algae in the class Trebouxiophyceae. Bruckenthalia is a genus of plants consisting of only one species, Bruckenthalia spiculifolia (spike heath) an evergreen shrub native to southeastern Europe and Asia Minor. It bears bright, showy paintbrush - shaped inflorescences of small red to yellowish - red tubular flowers. The leaves are up to 5 m long, and pinnate. It began as a courtship dance practiced among the Indigenous population on the Caribbean coasts of Colombia. They are used as ornamental plants with the common name pearl bush, or pearlbush. It has wide distribution, and many common names such as common orange lichen, yellow scale, maritime sunburst lichen and shore lichen. It is similar to the genus Bossiella. Calliarthron is calcified, but also has uncalcified joints that allow it to flex in response to the waves to which it is subjected. The name comes from the Greek emmeno meaning (I cleave) and sperma , (seed). It is a loose, spreading shrub with many branches up to 2 m high, with mature trunks of 5–10 cm diameter. The genus was described by German naturalist Carl Friedrich Philipp von Martius in 1830. Xanthosoma sagittifolium, the arrowleaf elephant ear or arrowleaf elephant 's ear, is a species of tropical flowering plant in the genus Xanthosoma, which produces an edible, starchy corm. The subspecies rupicola (Wyoming threetip sagebrush) is a dwarf subspecies with decumbent branches, spreading to about half a meter but growing only about 15 centimeters tall. It is also known by common names including cudrang, mandarin melon berry, silkworm thorn, zhe or che (Chinese: 柘 ; pinyin: zhè), and Chinese mulberry (but not to be confused with Morus australis also known by that name). Vepris lanceolata (umZane or white ironwood) is a large, evergreen tree of South Africa. Flowers arise on nodding stalks a few centimeters tall. Some species rely on fire regimes for germination, and are an understorey dominant and nitrogen fixer. The Plant List includes this genus in family Melianthaceae. Rhynchosia (Snoutbean) is a genus of plants in the Fabaceae family. Agrostophyllum is a genus with about ninety species from the orchid family (Orchidaceae). Cactus mistletoe is Tristerix aphylla, a Patagonian Argentinean and Chilean species of mistletoe, whose preferred hosts are two species of cactus. Notylia, abbreviated Ntl in horticultural trade, is a genus of orchids. Phyllophoraceae is a family of red algae in the order Gigartinales. Seed dispersal is mostly by birds, though monkeys, porcupines and squirrels have also been observed eating the fruits. This genus has some species of high commercial value, with few or no chemical or biological studies. Between Balladonia and Caiguna is a 146.6-kilometre (91.1 mi) stretch of the highway which is one of the longest straight stretches of road in the world. Exbucklandia is a genus of flowering plants in the family Hamamelidaceae. The holotype is kept at Herbario Nacional del Ecuador (QCNE), and the isotype at Rio Palenque Science Center (RPSC). The genus has a wide distribution, native to the tropical regions of Central and South America, Africa, Madagascar and southern Asia. Guaduella is a genus of African plants in the grass family, the only genus in the tribe Guaduellieae. The size varies regionally with available rainfall, with small, shrubby plants in dry areas such as western Texas and New Mexico, and larger trees in moister areas of Mexico ; plants in Texas, New Mexico, and the far northeast of Mexico are distinguished as a variety, A. xalapensis var. texana, or even a distinct species A. texana, by some botanists, but others do not regard these as distinct. The leaves are oblong to lanceolate, 5–17 cm (2 - 6.8 inches) long and 1.5–5 cm (0.6 - 2 inches) broad, with an entire or serrated margin. In summer, the shining foliage is dark green and very smooth, and in autumn the leaves commonly turn brilliant colors, ranging from yellow and orange to more commonly red, pink, purple, and bronze. However, since the color often develops very late in autumn, the leaves may be killed by a hard frost before full color can develop. The Polygalaceae or the milkwort family are made up of flowering plants in the order Fabales. Leaf rusts and fireblight are among the many foliage diseases to affect this species. The genus was named for Chloris of Greek myth, a figure associated with flowers and spring. The genus contains three species, all endemic to New Caledonia. It was formed by a merger between the aircraft and rocket engine manufacturer and aerospace component manufacturer group SNECMA and the security company SAGEM in 2005. [ 4][5 ] Some species have flowers that are tightly packed into fluffy - looking inflorescences, the trait that gives them their common name. However, the cytoskeleton - associated genes that play key roles in the dynamic organization of the cytoskeleton were dramatically repressed. Characiosiphon is a genus of green algae in the family Characiosiphonaceae. Acer barbinerve, commonly known as bearded maple, is an Asian species of maple found in Korea, eastern Russia, and northeastern China (Heilongjiang, Jilin, Liaoning).Acer barbinerve is a shrub up multi - stemmed tree up to 7 meters tall, with smooth gray bark. Invasive plants often gain such an advantage through alteration of soil microbial communities. It was introduced to the West in 1896, but remains rare in cultivation. It has fibrous roots and rhizomes or woody caudices. Amanita pantherina, also known as the panther cap and false blusher due to its similarity to the true blusher (Amanita rubescens), is a species of fungus found in Europe and Western Asia. In some cases, the parental environment affected the magnitude of (interacted with) the observed seed size effects. It is found in its natural state only on Aride Island, where its habitat is protected by Island Conservation Society. The leaf blade is divided into leaflets which are subdivided into smaller segments which may be lobed or deeply cut. Dipteronia is a genus of two living and one extinct species, regarded in the soapberry family Sapindaceae sensu lato after Angiosperm Phylogeny Group (APG I 1998, APG II 2003) and more recently (Harrington et al. 2005)) or traditionally by several authors in Aceraceae, related to the maples. Rhodochytrium is a genus of green algae in the family Chlorochytriaceae. Subsequently, it was found (Xie et al., 2009) that Rehmannia and Triaenophora are jointly the sister group to Lindenbergia and the parasitic Orobanchaceae. It is native to South and Southeast Asia, although its exact origin is unknown. It is a medium - size, evergreen tree growing up to 18 m with beautiful yellow flowers. These are hairy plants growing low to the ground and covered in crinkly dull green leaves. It is related to Jaffrea, endemic to New Caledonia. They are commonly known as the springparsleys. In this wide area there are many variant forms that have received species names, but can also be considered as synonyms. There are some 50 species in this genus, nine occurring in South Africa. Spenceria ramalana is the lone species in the plant genus Spenceria, known by two varieties. It is sometimes referred to as the Welsh Star - of - Bethlehem. It contains 19 genera if Phyllocladus is included and if Manoao and Sundacarpus are recognized. Root organ cultures of both Medicago truncatula and Daucus carota, expressing the nuclear - localized cameleon reporter NupYC2.1, were used to monitor AM - elicited Ca(2 +) responses in host root tissues. Planted commercially: in South Africa and Queensland, Australia at mid altitudes. It grows up to 60 centimetres (24 in) tall and is found in rock crevices and cliff - top grassland. The Dahlgren system had segregated some of these plants as family Limoniaceae. However C E Hubbard describes its height as ranging from 10 to 70 cm high, whereas Agrostis gigantea is 40–120 centimetres (16–47 in). Rinorea is a genus of plant in family Violaceae. Poranthera is a genus of flowering plant belonging to the family Phyllanthaceae first described as a genus in 1811.It is one of eight genera in the tribe Poranthereae. Evidence for functional divergence in arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi from contrasting climatic origins. It is commonly found on wet grounds, on the high pastures, above 1500 m. The inflorescence is a solitary flower in shades of white, pink, or blue. The regulation of the anaerobic gene expression in Chlamydomonas is only partly explained by responses to anoxia. Paspalum is a genus of plants in the grass family. The group is widespread across much of Asia, Africa, Australia, and the Americas Commonly known as paspalum, bahiagrasses, crowngrasses or dallis grasses, many of the species are tall perennial New World grasses. Another widely seen common name is serrets or serrettes. All species are woody, with essential oils, and flower parts in multiples of four or five. Gene expression analysis of wounding - induced root - to - shoot communication in Arabidopsis thaliana. ), Q. incana (Q. R. H. Richens noted that there are elm - populations in north - west Spain, in northern Portugal and on the Mediterranean coast of France that closely resemble the English Elm and appear to be trees of long standing in those regions rather than recent introductions. Charia (Greek: Χαριά) is a village in the municipal unit of Oleni, Elis, Greece. They comprise about 1700 species and have a cosmopolitan distribution. Symplocarpus is a genus of flowering plants in the family Araceae, native to United States, Canada and eastern Asia. Bulbine is a genus of plants in the family Asphodelaceae and subfamily Asphodeloideae, named for the bulb - shaped tuber of many species. It contains at least 87 species and is distributed mainly around the Mediterranean basin. Within this administrative framework a new provisional constitution was passed in August 2012, which reformed Somalia as a federation. It used to have 3 other subspecies, which have now been re - classified as separate species ; Iris spuria subsp. halophila (now Iris halophila), Iris spuria ssp. sogdiana (now Iris halophile subsp. sogdiana) and Iris spuria subsp. notha (now Iris notha). Cyrtochloa is a genus of Philippine bamboo in the grass family. The branches are gray, thick between 2 and 3 mm in diameter. Valonia oak (Quercus macrolepis), a tree species used in tanning In some of the older systems of plant taxonomy, such as the Cronquist system, the plants that now form the family Dasypogonaceae were also considered to belong to this family. It is endemic to Mexico. The wood of Bobea is hard, wearable, and yellow. The fragrant flower cones, known as hops, impart a bitter flavor, and also have aromatic and preservative qualities. The species are evergreen shrubs and small to medium - sized trees (up to 20 m tall), with medium - sized to large leaves (very large, over 40 cm long, in a few species). The species is sparsely distributed, but most commonly occurs in the central areas of its range. The tree flowers throughout the year and the flowers too are strongly scented with its fragrance. The leaves are oval in shape, the upper ones with serrated edges. It is found in wetlands and along the riverine systems of the eastern United States from Texas to the Atlantic states, its territory extending northward to southern Ontario. In particular those of Ormosia coccinea are often used for jewelry and other decorative purposes, or as good luck charms. It is apparently native to the eastern and central parts of the United States and naturalized in Canada, the western United States, Mesoamerica, South America, South Africa, and eastern Asia. Its genus is distributed in southern China, the Himalayas, Indochina, Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines. Species accepted as of June 2014: Moreover, NO accumulation was not observed in H7 plants overexpressing the A. thaliana nonsymbiotic hemoglobin Arabidopsis haemoglobin 1 (AHb1). Here, we used this information to identify genes involved in the reproductive processes of this edible fungus. The common name late hawthorn refers to the flowering time, which is later than most North American hawthorns. Some varieties of potato contain greater glycoalkaloid concentrations than others ; breeders developing new varieties test for this, and sometimes have to discard an otherwise promising cultivar. Members of the genus are commonly known as star - scaled cloak ferns and are native to the Americas. Elleanthus robustus is a species of flowering plant from the orchid family, Orchidaceae. These findings provide a temporal roadmap of bud formation in white spruce. Vania King (born 1989), tennis player from the United States There are around 160 species. Rondeletia odorata is widely grown as an ornamental. Dipteronia dyeriana is listed by the IUCN as being a Red List threatened species. Mints will grow 10–120 cm tall and can spread over an indeterminate area. Though they are slow - growing, they can eventually reach 6–10 ft (1.8 - 3 m). Bellis is a genus of flowering plants in the sunflower family. The group is native to Europe, the Mediterranean and northern Africa. Like genus Cleome and several relatives, Wislizenia has traditionally been included in the caper family, Capparaceae, but has more recently been moved to the new family Cleomaceae. Wislizenia is an erect, branching herb which forms a low, scrubby bush. It is known commonly as the double flowered paphiopedilum. This species grows on limestone in forest habitat. It has also become sparingly naturalized in scattered locations in Australia and North America. As a single species the correct name is E. racemosa. Boykinia is a small genus of plants related to the saxifrages. Rotala rotundifolia, the dwarf rotala, is a plant species often confused with Rotala indica. As circumscribed by APG II - system, the order includes about 6000 species within 9 families. The genus is native to Asia, but its members can now be found worldwide. Because asters are included in the many “ we all pull up in various spots in the yard, check out those tallish plants that always come up by your garbage can. The center of diversity is in the Cape Floristic Region. As of September 2012, the Metroid series had sold over 17.44 million copies. It can be found on the northern prairies, often near streams, and accompanying cottonwoods. Depending on the cultivar, triticale can more or less resemble either of its parents. Its seeds, cocoa beans, are used to make cocoa mass, cocoa powder, confectionery, ganache and chocolate. As described by H.C.F. It is an evergreen tree that is native to the Southeastern United States. Air Plants: This plant requires moderate care and is able to thrive in almost any environment. Loeseliastrum (calico) is a small genus of flowering plants in the phlox family. Scaphyglottis reflexa is a species of orchid occurring from Grenada to Central America and tropical South America. Plants in flower lack a true leaf, although those plants that are not flowering do possess a green leaf. The genus was formerly classified within a broader interpretation of the related genus Aralia. Byblis species look very similar to Drosera and Drosophyllum, but are distinguished by their zygomorphic flowers, with five curved stamens off to one side of the pistil. Taxus × media, more commonly known as the Anglojap yew or simply Taxus media, is a conifer (more specifically, a yew) created by the hybridization of yew species Taxus baccata and Taxus cuspidata. Typically, Murdannia species are found in open areas in mesic soils. It was formerly treated as subspecies of the related species Dendromecon rigida, and had the botanical name Dendromecon rigida subsp. harfordii. Cells in the thymus can be divided into thymic stromal cells and cells of hematopoietic origin (derived from bone marrow resident hematopoietic stem cells). Physokentia is a genus of flowering plant in the palm family, native to certain islands of the western Pacific. They are usually called coontails or hornworts, although hornwort is also used for unrelated plants of the division Anthocerotophyta. Aegilops is a genus of Eurasian and North American plants in the grass family, Poaceae. Phaedranassa and Rauhia are the genera most closely related to Eucrosia. Wood betony, Stachys officinalis, was the most important medicinal herb to the Anglo - Saxons of early medieval Great Britain. Astragalus centralpinus is a species of milkvetch in the family Fabaceae. The Poales are a large order of flowering plants in the monocotyledons, and includes families of plants such as the grasses, bromeliads, and sedges. Decne. Caryopteris (bluebeard ; Chinese: 莸属 you shu) is a genus of flowering plants in the family Lamiaceae (formerly often placed in the family Verbenaceae). There are about 640 species in around 23 genera, widespread in the tropical, subtropical and warm temperate regions of the world. Jubaea is a genus of palms with one species, Jubaea chilensis or Jubaea spectabilis, commonly known as the Chilean wine palm or Chile cocopalm . Melilotus officinalis, known as yellow sweet clover, yellow melilot, ribbed melilot and common melilot is a species of legume native to Eurasia and introduced in North America, Africa and Australia. Ingestion of the plant, which contains dangerous levels of the chemicals scopolamine and atropine, is often fatal. The inflorescence at the end of the stem is a small, crowded raceme of several flowers. 1397 in 2011) sits on the southwest peninsula of the Peloponnese on the Gulf of Messinia in southern Greece, 56 km (35 mi) by road southwest of Kalamata. For investigating cadmium uptake, we incubated protoplasts obtained from leaves of Thlaspi caerulescens (Ganges ecotype) with a Cd - specific fluorescent dye. If the series is successful, collected chapters may be republished in tankōbon volumes, frequently but not exclusively, paperback books. It is an annual, sprawling plant that is native to North America. Roupala is a neotropical genus of woody shrubs and trees in the plant family Proteaceae. Cubanola domingensis, or campanita, are small showy trees from the Dominican Republic. The first published name for the species is Erica herbacea ; however, the name E. carnea (published three pages later in the same book) is so widely used, and the earlier name so little used, that a formal proposal to conserve the name E. carnea over E. herbacea was accepted by the International Botanical Congress in 1999. The season was late, and flowering plants were sparse in the clearings, but creeping scarlet Rhododendron forrestii remains in the memory. The addition of other electron transport chain (ETC) inhibitors did not result in significant CH4 formation indicating that a site - specific disturbance of the ETC at complex IV causes CH4 formation in plant cells. The genus includes about 300 species found worldwide, often in arid warm regions. Flowers are in a widely branching terminal panicle. As a result, the Japanese hop is not used in the production of beer. This species is a host plant for the butterfly Polygonia c - aureum, the Asian comma. The red flowers appear between early winter and early spring. It is endemic to the island of Hispaniola in the Greater Antilles. The flowers are solitary or in umbels of two to several together, each flower 1–2 cm (0.39–0.79 in) diameter, with five white, pink, red, or purple petals. They are native to east Asia (China, Korea, Japan, Mongolia).They are herbaceous plants or small shrubs growing to 1–4 m tall. We identified various subsets of TFs that responded differentially through time and in an oxygen concentration - dependent manner. Dendrocnide species are used as food plants by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species, including Aenetus scotti. Thereafter, the grass should not be cut until the end of July to allow the yellow rattle to flower and go to seed, then cut short. Sage is wonderfully soothing for an herbal foot bath. These legumes are most common in warm regions and many species are aquatic. Savory is another herb that should be added to your rock wall herb garden. There are six stamens with white anthers, and the ovary at the center is yellow when the flower is fresh. Paliurus spina - christi and Colletia cruciata) spectacularly so. Hydrodictyaceae is a family of green algae in the order Sphaeropleales. The genus is closely related to (and sometimes included in) Silene, differing in the flowers having five styles (three in Silene), the seed capsule having five teeth (six in Silene), and in the sticky stems of Lychnis. Metroid follows space - faring bounty hunter Samus Aran, who protects the galaxy from the Space Pirates and their attempts to harness the power of the parasitic Metroid creatures. Pecten oculi, a structure in the bird retina which contains most of the vasculature Beilschmiedia is a genus of trees and shrubs in family Lauraceae. It is native to Southeast Asia, southern China, and New Guinea with a few species in Queensland and on some islands of the Pacific. Species accepted as of June 2014: A monotypic genus formerly known as Hewardia, it contains a single species, Isophysis tasmanica, endemic to the mountains of Western Tasmania growing in heathland on sandy soils. Allspice, also called pimenta, Jamaica pimenta, or myrtle pepper, is the dried unripe fruit (berries, used as a spice) of Pimenta dioica, a midcanopy tree native to the Greater Antilles, southern Mexico, and Central America, now cultivated in many warm parts of the world. Like in almost all Asteraceae, the individual flowers are 5-merous, small and clustered in typical heads, and which are surrounded by an involucre of in this case three whorls of bracts. The frailejón plant is endangered due to destruction of the páramo for agricultural purposes, especially potato crops. The caudex of D. mexicana is divided into regular polygonal plates that become protuberant with age, and separated by deep fissures. Potentilla fragarioides is a member of the family Rosaceae that is native to China, Japan, Korea, Mongolia, and Russia. Leaf respiration continues in the light but at a reduced rate. It can grow in moist or dry habitat. The family is widespread, occurring on every continent from boreal to tropical regions. To ensure they flower, place the cactus in an area that achieves lots of sunlight and be sparing on water. J. Fujishima / B.W. Various subspecies are found on other mountains. A notable feature is the formation of a large papery husk derived from the calyx, which partly or fully encloses the fruit. Bunium is a genus of flowering plants in the Apiaceae, with 45 to 50 species. Skimmia japonica. The outside of the flower is generally hairless, while the inside may be lined with white or yellowish hairs. The common name saguaro came into the English language through the Spanish language, originating in the Mayo language. The flower has petals fused into a pouch - like shape, with a small opening. It was first named in 1742 by Albrecht von Haller and later brought into modern botanical nomenclature in 1801 by Johann Hedwig to commemorate Johann Christian Buxbaum, a German physician and botanist who discovered the moss in 1712 at the mouth of the Volga River. Muscari is a genus of perennial bulbous plants native to Eurasia that produce spikes of dense, most commonly blue, urn - shaped flowers resembling bunches of grapes in the spring. It is an annual herb growing decumbent to upright in form with mostly hairless herbage. Moreover, CO(2) #NAME? changes in the leaf proteome were most evident in the oldest source leaves. Minuartia sedoides was previously placed in Cherleria. Polianthes is a genus of plants in family Asparagaceae, subfamily Agavoideae. The species, Gymnema sylvestre, is commonly used as a dietary supplement and has the unique ability to suppress the taste of sweetness. It has basal sword - shaped leaves with prominent midveins. Twenty are found in New Caledonia and one reaches Australia. Dirca is a genus of three or four species of flowering plants in the family Thymelaeaceae, native to North America. Named for its discoverer, Australian botanist William A. Schipp, the species is threatened by habitat loss. This is the must - have herb if making a cream for elderly skin. The generic name Pinguicula is derived from the Latin pinguis (meaning fat ) due to the buttery texture of the surface of the carnivorous leaves. Several oils like kumaraguru enney ; merugulli enney, merugu pachai enneyetc. It has the common names of spiral wrack and flat wrack. Poranthera is native to Australia and New Zealand. Erycina (plant), a flowering plant genus in the family Orchidaceae It was formed in 1992 from species previously placed in Cheilanthes and Notholaena. Dancinglady orchid is a common name for plants in this genus. Haetera is a Neotropical butterfly genus from the subfamily Satyrinae in the family Nymphalidae. Common names include wingleaf soapberry, western soapberry, jaboncillo, sulluku and manele and a'e (Hawaiian). Commiphora myrrha, called myrrh, African myrrh, herabol myrrh, Somali myrrhor, common myrrh, or gum myrrh is a tree in the Burseraceae family. It is an invasive plant species in New Zealand and is listed on the National Pest Plant Accord. The male flowers are inconspicuous yellow - green catkins produced in spring at the same time as the new leaves appear. They may reach 50 m (160 ft) in height. Plumbago zeylanica, commonly known as Ceylon leadwort, doctorbush or wild leadwort, is a species of plumbago with a pantropical distribution. Syzygium moorei is a rare sub tropical rainforest tree, growing on volcanic soils in the Mount Warning area of north east New South Wales and south east Queensland, Australia. They are native to tropical and warm temperate areas of the world, especially tropical Africa. It is widespread and common in the Canadian Arctic Archipelago. This perennial plant produces stems up to 50 centimeters tall, singly or in pairs, from a rhizome. Its small flowers are white - tipped pink. formerly includedSeveral species were at one time included in Jungia but are now regarded as more appropriate in other genera (Acourtia and Pleocarphus). Flowers are deep red with black and yellow markings toward the center with a green stem. The type species for the genus is Rogiera amoena. Rogiera was named by Jules Émile Planchon in 1849. Lamium (dead - nettles) is a genus of about 40–50 species of flowering plants in the family Lamiaceae, of which it is the type genus. It 's a deciduous tree usually 7–15 m tall, but has reached 25 m and a trunk diameter of 2 m. [ 1 ] Fragrant flowers appear after fire or rain, and are blue or mauve, or rarely white. The lack of ritual observances pertains to the legal status of the individual in society, not the emotional response of families to the loss. Jacquiniella (tufted orchid) is a genus of flowering plants from the orchid family, Orchidaceae. Plants of this genus, some of which are aquatic, can be used in alley cropping to increase the soil 's nitrogen content. It is native to North and South America. & Paxton (1852) Scaphyglottis fusiformis is a species of orchid found from Costa Rica to tropical South America. Asthenochloa is a genus of Southeast Asian plants in the grass family. Pseudosorghum is a genus of Asian plants in the grass family. Along with help for muscle and joint pain, ginger has been found to reduce the severity of migraine headaches as well as the migraine medication Sumatriptan – with fewer side effects.4 It is found in shallow peaty calcareous lakes, ponds and ditches, commonly associated with lowland fens. Telfairia is a small genus of flowering plants in the squash family which are native to Africa. It comprises about 182 species. Ellend, known in Croatian as Lenda, a village in Hungary Cats are more sensitive. It is native to South America and Mexico, but naturalized in Singapore and Hawaii, and cultivated in plantations and wind - breaks elsewhere. Artemisia is a large, diverse genus of plants with between 200 and 400 species belonging to the daisy family Asteraceae. Brugmansia (aka Angel 's Trumpet) Low temperatures limit the fixation of photosynthates and xylogenesis. Hypsidia is a genus of moths belonging to the subfamily Thyatirinae. It is native to western North America from Alaska and northwestern Canada to California and New Mexico, as well as eastern Russia. The genus now contains only seven species, two native to eastern North America and the other five native to Asia, Australia, Africa, or Madagascar. The name water net comes from the (usually pentagonal or hexagonal) mesh structure of their colonies, which can extend several decimeters. The inflorescence is a head of flowers held at, or just above the ground but mostly covered by soil or leaf litter and little is known about the mechanism of pollination. The Hawaiian saying: ʻAi no i ka ʻape he maneʻo no ka nuku (The eater of ʻape will have an itchy mouth) means there will be consequences for partaking of something bad".In a 2012 study, it was found out that the domesticated giant taro originated from the Philippines. The 1889 book ' The Useful Native Plants of Australia ' records that Indigenous Australian names included Pitchu in the Burnett River (Queensland) ; Cunjevoi (South Queensland) ; Hakkin Rockhampton It could be native to the West Indies, but its exact origin is unknown due to widespread cultivation. ), Brassica napus (rapeseed, etc. S. laureola is also used in bonsai. (A former Pentapogon species, Pentapogon drummondii, is now placed in Calamagrostis as Calamagrostis drummondii.) Pteridium). Koeleria macrantha is a species of grass known by the common name prairie Junegrass in North America and crested hair - grass in the UK. It 's an Australian native whose range extends through New South Wales, Victoria and Tasmania. It is also used in Chinese and Southeast Asian cuisine. Berberis thunbergii, the Japanese barberry, Thunberg 's barberry, or red barberry, is a species of flowering plant in the barberry family, Berberidaceae, native to Japan and eastern Asia, though widely naturalized in China and in North America. The other major types of commercially grown bean are the runner bean (Phaseolus coccineus) and the broad bean (Vicia faba). The red fruit is about a centimeter long. Currently, according to the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group, the family belongs in Fabales. For example, in China, Balanophora is known as she - gu (stone - fungus) and in Thailand as hoh - ra - tao - su - nak. The species was first formally described by botanist Robert Brown, his description published in Transactions of the Linnean Society of London in 1810. Pipturus is a flowering plant genus in the nettle family, Urticaceae. Central and South America, Mexico, and the West Indies, with many of the species endemic to Brazil. It is a multipurpose plant, which allows the survival of nomads by providing them with seeds. They vary from 50-m - high trees to small trees or shrubs in lowland evergreen forest and rainforest. Kalmia species are used as food plants by the larvae of some lepidopteran species including Coleophora kalmiella which feeds exclusively on Kalmia. The leaves have lance - shaped or pointed oval blades up to 10 centimeters long which are borne on petioles. The new agency became operational on October 1, 1958. The leaves have silver marks and wavy margins. The longest are about 7 millimeters in length. With a mainland area of 2780400 km2 (1073500 sq mi), Argentina is the eighth - largest country in the world, the second largest in Latin America, and the largest Spanish - speaking nation. This practice led to the tree 's common names — fishpoison and fishfuddle. Cattleya () is a genus of orchids from Costa Rica south to Argentina. This makes the flower effectively upside down, or non - resupinate. Though somewhat reminiscent of willows (Salix) in their habitus, they are not particularly close relatives of these. L.C. Recently, the two monotypic genera Chaunostoma and Neoeplingia were shown to be part of Lepechinia. It includes four species of sea grass distributed in warm oceans. The flowers are abundant, five - petalled and usually in shades of pink or white. The most familiar species might be common soapwort (S. officinalis), which is native to Eurasia but is known in much of the world as an introduced species, often a weed, and sometimes a cultivated ornamental plant. The seeds of T. occidentalis and T. pedata are over 25 % protein and 55 % oil, making them a good source of nutrition. Do quantitative vessel and pit characters account for ion - mediated changes in the hydraulic conductance of angiosperm xylem ? These plants are usually prickly herbs, or subshrubs, and they are native to tropical America. The common name is Little Mountain Palm. Argentina. It is also cultivated as an ornamental. Use a cotton ball or flannel square to dab it carefully on the dark area. Several are found only on offshore islands in the Pacific. Phylogenetic analysis demonstrates that Malacothrix is not monophyletic. This species is frequently submerged in its native habitat and will capture water arthropods and tadpoles, for example, while submerged. The name is derived from the Latin word for the pomegranate, malum punicum, meaning Carthaginian apple . A full list of the species now accepted in the genus, along with their synonyms, can be found at the World Checklist of Gesneriaceae. Otherwise, Ormosia wood is used as timber or firewood. The basal part of the lip (hypochile) is at least as long as the sidelobes. The generic name Allium is the Latin word for garlic, and the type species for the genus is Allium sativum which means cultivated garlic".Linnaeus first described the genus Allium in 1753. Extracts from these plant materials are thought to possess analgesic, sedative, and anti - inflammatory properties. Branches of a similar diameter emerge from the side of the main branch, then rapidly bifurcate to much finer widths. Constrained preferences in nitrogen uptake across plant species and environments. Mentha longifolia (horse mint ; syn. M. spicata var. longifolia L., M. sylvestris L., M. tomentosa D'Urv, M. incana Willd.) It is among the first plants to bloom in spring, after the snow has melted. It is composed of an unfermentable sugar called Eucalin, which is peculiar to the sap of the Eucalyptus, together with a devil 's hair for Cuscuta). before present) Ravenscrag formation of southwest Saskatchewan and adjacent Alberta, Canada. A subset of transcripts coding for trehalose, glyoxylate and methylcitrate enzymes was up - regulated in fruiting bodies, whereas genes involved in mannitol and glycogen metabolism were preferentially expressed in mycelia and ectomycorrhizas, respectively. and Scleroderma vulgare Horn. Earthballs are superficially similar to, and considered look - alikes of, the edible puffball, but whereas the puffball has a single opening on top through which the spores are dispersed, the earthball just breaks up to release the spores. It was previously in the family Euphorbiaceae, tribe Drypeteae, and was the sole pantropical zoochorous genus of the family. The seed produced was mechanically sieved into small and large size classes then grown in a common environment and subjected to a set of assays spanning the life cycle. Nigella sativa (black caraway, also known as black cumin, nigella, and kalonji) is an annual flowering plant in the family Ranunculaceae, native to south and southwest Asia. The name is from the Greek dendron ( tree ) and bios ( life ) ; it means one who lives on trees , or, essentially, epiphyte . The species are medium - sized to large trees growing up to 15–25 m (rarely 50 m) tall. Blatter and Millard (1937) state: The species is sometimes known as flowering fern due to the appearance of its fertile fronds. The species is considered vulnerable by the World Conservation Union. Cypella crenata (Vell.) It is native to Cameroon and Gabon. Fritillaria lusitanica subsp. oranensis, now called Fritillaria oranensis This species is leafy - stemmed and scrambling, growing up to 10 cm tall with leaves to 3 cm long and 5 mm wide. It is confined to the southwestern United States. While currently included in the genus Monotropa, recent genetic evidence strongly suggests that Monotropa hypopitys should be placed in its own genus, Hypopitys, with the single species Hypopitys monotropa Crantz, but possibly containing several other species. It had been known for many years as Drimys lanceolata. Small greenish flowers appear in spring, and are borne singly in the centre of the cladodes. Leaves are larger than those of most related species, up to 50 cm (20 in) long, each with 3 or 5 prominent veins running the length of the leaf. The rhizome is usually thin and wiry and the fronds variously pinnate with a single strand ( nerve ) of vascular tissue. You must pick a place where the growth is somewhat low (not where you have lots of tall flowers or grasses), and you can enjoy the show. This species is documented as a noxious invader in the southern U.S. There are about six species that are commonly known as buttonbush. It is also called one - sided pyrola, one - sided shinleaf, and one - sided wintergreen. The genus is named for an early explorer of the western United States, Nathaniel Jarvis Wyeth, 1802–1856. This genus is among those colloquially called three - awns wiregrasses, speargrasses and needlegrasses. Aristida stems are ascending to erect, with both basal and cauline leaves. If you lack space in your home, these species are a great option, as you can also hang them from the wall. Citta (Pali and Sanskrit) is one of three overlapping terms used in the nikayas to refer to the mind, the others being manas and viññāṇa. Most species are found in lowland or montane rainforests, but some occur in drier habitats such as the restingas of Brazil, caribbean coastal scrub and dry interandean valleys. It has a very small natural range and is found growing in the wind southwest of Salvador on elevated plateaus that border the drainage of the Paraguaca River. Moldenke, Polygonum multiflorum Thunb., tuber fleeceflower, or Chinese knotweed) is a species of flowering plant in the buckwheat family Polygonaceae. There are four described species in the Amylostereaceae: A. chailletii (the type), A. areolatum, A. ferreum and A. laevigatum. Like many other ericaceous plants, they are generally restricted to acidic soils. & Planch., Didymopanax morototoni var. angustipetalum March ; Panax morototoni Aublet ; Sciadophyllum paniculatum Britton) is a timber tree native to southern Mexico, the Greater Antilles, Central America, and South America. Fallopia convolvulus, the black - bindweed or wild buckwheat, is a fast - growing annual flowering plant in the family Polygonaceae native throughout Europe, Asia and northern Africa. Ligulatae) remains to be resolved to full satisfaction. They range from Iberia to the Near East and East Africa, but are most diverse in the Maghreb. ex Planch.) Gloriosa superba is a species of flowering plant in the family Colchicaceae. Use only your own roses or certified organic / wild rose petals for this. Three species are found in China, two species are found in Korea, and one species is found in Japan. Other common names for P. tomentosa include Korean cherry, Manchu cherry, downy cherry, Shanghai cherry, Ando cherry, mountain cherry, Chinese bush cherry, or Chinese dwarf cherry. It is probably of hybrid origin between Prunus incisa and Prunus spachiana. Pilinella is a genus of green algae in the family Chaetophoraceae. The dense spikes of flowers are not particularly striking and are often brown, green or purple. A comparison of in situ labelling with monochlorobimane (MCB) and in vitro labelling with monobromobimane (MBB) revealed that, whereas in situ labelling of Col-0 leaf glutathione was complete within 2 h incubation, about 50 % of leaf glutathione remained inaccessible to MCB in cat2. When it causes disease, the clinical presentation is often subtle and preceded by a recent history of stomatitis or upper respiratory infection. The saguaro (, Spanish pronunciation: [ saˈɣwaɾo ]) (Carnegiea gigantea) is an arborescent (tree - like) cactus species in the monotypic genus Carnegiea, which can grow to be over 40 feet (12 m) tall. It lives in sunny hills, walls and rocky places. With Daphne mezereum it is one of two species of Daphne native to Britain, both of which have a strong preference for alkaline soils and are most commonly found in limestone areas, although D. laureola is also found on clay. When it is too hot for photosynthesis: heat - induced instability of photosynthesis in relation to respiratory burst, cell permeability changes and H2O2 formation. The genus is named for the Swedish - American naturalist Thure Kumlien. Thalia is a genus of six currently recognized species found in aquatic or marshy habitats, ranging in Africa from Senegal to Sudan to Zimbabwe, and in the Americas from Illinois to Argentina. Ormeniș, village in Viișoara municipality, Mureș County, Romania Serratula tinctoria, commonly known as dyer 's plumeless saw - wort or saw - wort, is a species in the genus Serratula. Miltonia clowesii, the Clowes ' Miltonia, is a species of orchid endemic to southeastern Brazil. The name was originally coined in 1812, the description based on a specimen grown at Kew Botanical Garden in London, the bulb having been seized by British sailors from a French ship captured by the Royal Navy in 1803.Hymenocallis tubiflora is a bulb - forming perennial. Sexual reproduction has since been shown to be possible. Artemisia abrotanum, the southernwood, lad 's love, or southern wormwood, is a species of flowering plants in the sunflower family. The flowers have a bee - like appearance ; bee orchid is sometimes used as a name for the genus. We demonstrate that transient expression of SYP121 in syp121 mutant plants is sufficient to rescue the K+ current in vivo. Plumbago is a genus of 10–20 species of flowering plants in the family Plumbaginaceae, native to warm temperate to tropical regions of the world. The lateral cymes are staminate. Pancratium is a genus of African and Eurasian perennial, herbaceous and bulbous plants in the Amaryllis family, subfamily AmaryllidoideaeThe flowers are large, white and fragrant. Hydraulic constraints limit height growth in trees at high altitude. In just a short amount of time, you ’ll begin to notice lengthy strands of pearls forming. (Saint Helena gumwood) The plant above ground is almost entirely made up of its inflorescence, a tightly packed column of thick cup - shaped flowers. Conoclinium coelestinum, the blue mistflower, is a North American species of herbaceous perennial flowering plant in the sunflower family. Cirsium oleraceum, the cabbage thistle or Siberian thistle, is a species of thistle in the genus Cirsium within the sunflower family, native to central and eastern Europe and Asia, where it grows in wet lowland soils. Cirsium oleraceum is a herbaceous perennial plant growing to 1.5 m tall, the stems unbranched or with only a very few branches. Luis Corozo, Peruvian footballer playing for FBC Melgar It is a herbaceous biennial plants (rarely short - lived perennial plants) growing to 1–2.5 metres (3.3–8.2 ft) tall. The genus has gained notability due to the widespread use of one of its species, S. lutea, as a garden plant. Castilleja applegatei is a species of Castilleja known by the common names Applegate 's Indian paintbrush and wavyleaf Indian paintbrush. They are considered fairly easy to grow and they may produce large quantities of seeds that germinate freely around the parent plant. Odisha ((listen) ; formerly Orissa,) is one of the 29 states of India, located in eastern India. It is endemic to Ecuador. Cryptogein, a fungal elicitor, remodels the phenylpropanoid metabolism of tobacco cell suspension cultures in a calcium - dependent manner. Maruta (band), a grindcore / death metal band from Florida The only synapomorphy within Moraceae is presence of laticifers and milky sap in all parenchymatous tissues, but generally useful field characters include two carpels sometimes with one reduced, compound inconspicuous flowers, and compound fruits. It is endemic to California, where it grows in open habitat on the slopes of the coastal mountain ranges, such as woodland and chaparral. Bomarea is divided into four subgenera, Baccata, Bomarea, Sphaerine, and Wichuraea. Kirengeshoma koreana, the Korean kirengeshoma, is a plant in the family Hydrangeaceae. It became a protected species in the UK in 1975 under the Conservation of Wild Creatures and Wild Plants Act. Photosynthesis rate (A(n)) becomes unstable above a threshold temperature, and the recovery upon return to low temperature varies because of reasons not fully understood. Prunus americana, commonly called the American plum, wild plum, or Marshall 's large yellow sweet plum, is a species of Prunus native to North America from Saskatchewan and Idaho south to New Mexico and east to Québec, Maine and Florida. Prunus americana has often been planted outside its native range and sometimes escapes cultivation. Veratrum is not closely related to hellebores, nor do they resemble them. Centipeda is a genus of flowering plants in the daisy family, Asteraceae. TFAR1 is potentially involved in cuticular wax formation during glandular trichome expansion in leaves and flowers of A. annua plants. Polystachya, abbreviated Pol in horticultural trade, and commonly known as yellowspike orchid, is a flowering plant genus in the orchid family (Orchidaceae). Some non - native mustards, such as garlic mustard, A. petiolata, an extremely invasive species in the United States, can be toxic to their larvae. The rosette of leaves arise from an inflated pseudobu